[Amit Varma]: The world is a complex place, perhaps too complex for us to understand in its entirety.
[Amit Varma]: As a species, we cope by telling ourselves stories about the world so that we can explain
[Amit Varma]: it to ourselves.
[Amit Varma]: That's how religion came about, in fact.
[Amit Varma]: In an age before science, we needed to explain the baffling natural phenomena around us.
[Amit Varma]: Where does the sun come from?
[Amit Varma]: Sun God.
[Amit Varma]: What explains thunder?
[Amit Varma]: Thunder God.
[Amit Varma]: Religions, of course, kept evolving, and with time, rationalism and science played a part
[Amit Varma]: in building truer narratives, a journey of discovery we are still on.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I often say that we draw our pictures of the world by joining dots.
[Amit Varma]: The more dots we have, the better the resolution, the clearer our picture.
[Amit Varma]: And what are these dots?
[Amit Varma]: At one level, these dots are knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: Every data point about the world helps us understand it better, unless, of course, we
[Amit Varma]: are getting those data points from news television.
[Amit Varma]: But as much as information, we also need to build frames of reference through which we
[Amit Varma]: look at the world.
[Amit Varma]: And we need multiple frames, because any one frame on its own will be simplistic.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I know people who have one hammer for every nail, one lens through which they look
[Amit Varma]: at the world.
[Amit Varma]: But the intellectuals I respect are those who have humility about how little they know,
[Amit Varma]: how little they understand, and who are trying to learn something new every day.
[Amit Varma]: One way of doing this is by reading a lot, but quantity of reading is not enough.
[Amit Varma]: Quality matters.
[Amit Varma]: You also need to be able to read across disciplines, so you can think out of the box on any one
[Amit Varma]: issue, bringing multiple frames of reference into play.
[Amit Varma]: You can bring insights from psychology into economics, or insights from probability theory
[Amit Varma]: to cricket strategy.
[Amit Varma]: And ideally, you need to not just gather knowledge this way and sharpen your vision, but it would
[Amit Varma]: help if you're a bloody good writer as well, so you can communicate your ideas to the world.
[Amit Varma]: Brothers and sisters of the seen and the unseen, let me present to you, Raghu Sanjaylal Jaitley.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: A year and a half ago, I subscribed to a newsletter, Anticipating the Unintended, at publicpolicy.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: by my good friend Pranay Kottasthane.
[Amit Varma]: Now, if Pranay is listening to this, I don't want to embarrass him with praise.
[Amit Varma]: I'll simply say that he's one of my favorite thinkers in the whole damn world.
[Amit Varma]: And his newsletter was kick-ass until its 21st edition, when he brought in a co-writer.
[Amit Varma]: Now typically, you'd expect the co-writer of such a fine thinker to dilute the quality
[Amit Varma]: of the newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: Ulta hua, Anticipating the Unintended became even more kick-ass.
[Amit Varma]: Pranay's co-writer was a gentleman named Raghu Sanjaylal Jaitley, and I swear to you, the
[Amit Varma]: first time I read him, my jaw just dropped.
[Amit Varma]: Who is this guy?
[Amit Varma]: Why have I not heard of him before?
[Amit Varma]: Raghu's writing on politics and economics blew my mind, and everything he wrote was
[Amit Varma]: so thought-provoking.
[Amit Varma]: He came across as so much more well-read than I was, and brought so many fascinating perspectives
[Amit Varma]: to bear on everything that he wrote about.
[Amit Varma]: Even on the rare occasions that I disagreed with him, my thinking was sharpened by having
[Amit Varma]: to articulate that disagreement to myself.
[Amit Varma]: So I have finally gotten him on the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Today's episode covers a lot of ground, from politics to economics to Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: I conceived this episode to be a ramble through a series of themes that I found interesting,
[Unknown]: which Raghu had written about.
[Amit Varma]: I am sure you will find a lot here that is stimulating and thought-provoking.
[Amit Varma]: Now before we begin, three quick notes.
[Amit Varma]: One, Raghu Sanjaylal Jaitley is a pseudonym, and we are maintaining that identity for this
[Amit Varma]: show.
[Amit Varma]: I do know who he really is, but I have never met him.
[Amit Varma]: He's based in Singapore right now, and I had not heard of him until I read his writings.
[Amit Varma]: The second note before you start listening, my online course, The Art of Clear Writing
[Amit Varma]: has now opened registrations for the March batch.
[Amit Varma]: It consists of four webinars over four Saturdays, classes start on March 6th.
[Amit Varma]: So register now at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, my third note, inspired by Raghu Sanjaylal Jaitley, I will now start writing
[Amit Varma]: my newsletter regularly, at least once a week, if not twice.
[Amit Varma]: So please head on over to indiancut.substack.com to subscribe.
[Amit Varma]: It's free.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, if Twitter ever gets banned in India, then you can still follow me with all my writings
[Amit Varma]: and podcasts coming straight to your inbox.
[Amit Varma]: That's right, only to your inbox.
[Amit Varma]: And now, finally, for our conversation, but first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: One of the things I've worked on in recent years is on getting my reading habit together.
[Amit Varma]: This involves making time to read books, but it also means reading long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays.
[Amit Varma]: There's a world of knowledge available through the internet.
[Amit Varma]: But the big question we all face is, how do we navigate this knowledge?
[Amit Varma]: Who will be our guide to all the awesome writing out there?
[Amit Varma]: Well, a couple of friends of mine run this awesome company called ctq compounds at ctq
[Amit Varma]: compounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves constantly to stay relevant
[Amit Varma]: for the future.
[Amit Varma]: A few months ago, I signed up for one of the programs called the daily reader.
[Amit Varma]: Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read.
[Amit Varma]: The subjects covered went from machine learning to mythology, to mental models to even marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better than I had before.
[Amit Varma]: Many listeners of the scene and the unseen asked me, hey, how can I build my reading
[Amit Varma]: habit?
[Amit Varma]: How can I up level my brain?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I have an answer for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to ctq compounds and check out the daily reader as well as their other activities,
[Amit Varma]: which will help you up level your future self.
[Amit Varma]: The next batch starts on Saturday, March 13th, and they have already done 15 batches before
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, you get a discount of a whopping rupees 2500 2500.
[Amit Varma]: If you use the discount code unseen, this is for both the daily reader and future stack
[Amit Varma]: another exciting program they have.
[Amit Varma]: So hit head on over to ctq compounds at ctq compounds.com and use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Up level yourself, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: It's a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, your name, because your name comes from Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: You're an Amir Khan fan.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, Bollywood informs you and gives you an interesting frame through which
[Amit Varma]: you look at so many issues in your newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: So who is this Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley or you know, where does the name come from?
[Guest]: Well, the name Amit comes from two Amir Khan films in 1991, Amir acted in a film called
[Guest]: Dil Hai Ki Manta Nahin, where his character was named Raghu Jaitley.
[Guest]: This was a, you know, our Indian version of it happened one night, the Frank Apra classic.
[Guest]: Mahesh Bhatt has either copied films or made films on his own life multiple times over.
[Guest]: So but Amir's name was Raghu Jaitley, and right in the next year in 92, Mansoor Khan
[Guest]: made Jo Jeeta Wahi Sikand, where Amir Khan's name was Sanjay Lal.
[Guest]: So I sort of, you know, blended the two in to create Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in your newsletter, you talk about how you were an 80s kid growing up in Bollywood.
[Amit Varma]: At one point, you say quote for the rare capitalist minded young boy growing up in the 80s Hindi
[Amit Varma]: films presented two viable career options, a smuggler or an industrialist, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you didn't go for the smuggler part of it.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about what kind of a kid were you growing up in the 80s?
[Amit Varma]: I get the Bollywood obsession, because we had nothing else, right?
[Amit Varma]: We didn't have the internet.
[Amit Varma]: We had television, which would, you know, one state owned channel, which would, you
[Amit Varma]: know, paucity of great programs.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you do for entertainment?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you know, Indian should not be judged for being so passionate, and almost obsessive
[Amit Varma]: about Bollywood and cricket, because what else was there?
[Amit Varma]: Okay, that's for my generation, young people today should find other things as well.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about that landscape.
[Guest]: What is it growing up in the 80s like?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, you know, Amit, a lot of your guests actually share a very similar kind of a background,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: And that's possibly your background.
[Guest]: That's my background.
[Guest]: I grew up in a really small town, at the heart of which was a public sector unit, a factory.
[Guest]: My father was a mid-level supervisor there.
[Guest]: And really, there were three things that, you know, sort of my life revolved around
[Guest]: at that point in time, outside of school.
[Guest]: So the first one was, you know, TV and radio.
[Guest]: That was the window to the world outside.
[Guest]: Even if TV was just a single channel sort of a thing, but, you know, we got a lot out
[Guest]: of it than what today's people get out of television.
[Guest]: Same with radio.
[Guest]: The other one was Hindi films.
[Guest]: So in some sense, Hindi films was a connect to the rest of India.
[Guest]: I mean, I never went to a metropolis till I was 23, but, you know, I had my own views
[Guest]: about how Bombay looks like and what people do in Bombay and colleges of Bombay and things
[Guest]: of that kind.
[Guest]: So that was second.
[Guest]: And third, you know, the state, for all its greatness, had made sure that we had a good
[Guest]: library.
[Guest]: So really, these three were the things around which my life revolved.
[Guest]: Of course, there were open playgrounds and I played a lot.
[Guest]: I'm keeping that aside.
[Guest]: But these three were, in some sense, you know, fuel or food to my intellectual curiosity,
[Guest]: in some sense.
[Guest]: And I was and I am a very, very curious child.
[Guest]: And I would still call myself a curious child because there is nothing that I don't sort
[Guest]: of read up and there is nothing that I don't feel, you know, more inquisitive about.
[Guest]: So I continued that particular passion right from the time I was a kid.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one thing that I sometimes touch upon is that, you know, when we were growing
[Amit Varma]: up, there were so few sources of information and knowledge, right?
[Amit Varma]: So whatever we could get hold of, we read voraciously.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, our reading was not confined to any particular genre or whatever, because
[Amit Varma]: we didn't have a choice.
[Amit Varma]: We read whatever you get.
[Amit Varma]: And I sometimes contrast that with today's kids growing up, maybe Gen Z, which essentially
[Amit Varma]: can access anything, listen to any song at any point in time, read any book.
[Amit Varma]: But the flip side of that, it strikes me and is that it is often remarked that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: young people of today don't have that deep sense of history, which is why, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you, for example, you see communism making a comeback and it's become fashionable to
[Amit Varma]: be a communist again, which after, you know, the horrors of the 20th century just blows
[Amit Varma]: my mind.
[Amit Varma]: And one theory that's been put forward for that is that, listen, in this modern world
[Amit Varma]: of hyperconnected social media, where there is so much new content being generated every
[Amit Varma]: day, perhaps more content as it were generated in one day, then it would have happened 10
[Amit Varma]: years before in any 10 year span before the internet or possibly much longer than that,
[Amit Varma]: that people are all the time consuming one, they take knowledge for granted.
[Amit Varma]: It's always there at the fingertips, you can Google or Wikipedia it.
[Amit Varma]: And two, what they are consuming is essentially very often stuff that was produced in the
[Amit Varma]: last three or four days.
[Amit Varma]: It's transient stuff, it is coming and going, it is floating.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that sense of history is not there.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, these, you know, one can form these ideological tribes on the basis of sort
[Amit Varma]: of all kinds of ideas, which, you know, if you had the slightest knowledge of history,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you would not quite do so.
[Amit Varma]: I've kind of rambled, so I won't elaborate on that.
[Amit Varma]: But what's your sense of this?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, I don't want to point to you and I being good readers and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: because I think even in our generation, we were obviously outliers, I keep saying in
[Amit Varma]: every generation, it's the same small sliver of people who are readers and who are who
[Amit Varma]: satisfy their curiosity per se to that extent.
[Amit Varma]: But what do you make of all of this, this sort of, you know, history ceasing to matter
[Amit Varma]: and all these narratives forming all the time the transient nature of the information that
[Guest]: we take in?
[Guest]: I think so, I mean, it's a fairly interesting point that you raise, Amit, you know, there
[Guest]: is a certain level of shallowness, which pervades, you know, every sphere these days, and especially
[Guest]: the intellectual discourse.
[Guest]: And that's because, you know, people are very keen on getting something in bullet forms
[Guest]: and, you know, in listicles and getting to know about it and going ahead and, you know,
[Guest]: making a point or, you know, informing their worldview.
[Guest]: I think there is a space for curated content by experts, which brings balance and perspective.
[Guest]: And I think that we have reached that stage where, you know, gradually this, you know,
[Guest]: this plethora of choices that you have now for all kinds of information, I mean, it's
[Guest]: reaching a point where people are, you know, starting to feel that there is no sense to
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: I think, you know, for instance, the Asha monk, you know, who started persuasion, I
[Guest]: think that's in some sense a reaction to this, a whole host of newsletters, I mean, of which,
[Guest]: you know, whatever little sort of fame I have got, because of which you've known me, is
[Guest]: an attempt to actually do something like that, to actually take a topic, you know, view it
[Guest]: not just from today's immediate lens, but ask yourself whether, you know, there is history
[Guest]: behind something of this kind, I mean, which will allow you to understand how similar things
[Guest]: have actually happened in the past.
[Guest]: And you know, like Nietzsche said, I mean, it's, you know, we are, there is eternal recurrence.
[Guest]: We are in a, you know, eternal series of cycles.
[Guest]: And it is true.
[Guest]: And as I have, you know, discovered while writing this newsletter, every modern event
[Guest]: has an echo of it sometime in the past, where somebody has thought about that kind of an
[Guest]: event, somebody has written about it.
[Guest]: And therefore, I believe that, you know, just having a transient view of a particular subject,
[Guest]: you know, forming a very strong view about it is absolutely the wrong way to go.
[Guest]: And people can go deeper, must go deeper, if you really want to actually affect a change.
[Guest]: If you truly believe that you should affect a change, the shallow views actually won't
[Guest]: help.
[Guest]: You will need to go deeper.
[Guest]: So and I can give you multiple examples of it.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, I was just going through, you know, this insurrection at the Capitol
[Guest]: Hill, right?
[Guest]: I mean, whatever these jokers tried to do there.
[Guest]: And my thought immediately went to, you know, the first of this storming of the parliament
[Guest]: that happened in 1642.
[Guest]: Not that I'm a history nerd of that kind, but listen, I mean, I've read history.
[Guest]: Like you, as I figured out, I was also a quizzer of dubious merit, but I, you know, went all
[Guest]: around the world trying my luck with quizzes.
[Guest]: But then you realize that, you know, in 1642, somebody tried to storm the parliament in
[Guest]: England and various things happened.
[Guest]: And there was somebody called Thomas Hobbes at that point in time, who was sort of observing
[Guest]: this from Paris.
[Guest]: And you know, a whole political philosophy starts off from there because of that single
[Guest]: storming of the parliament.
[Guest]: So, you know, there are things for people to actually go deeper and make sense of what's
[Guest]: happening around them today.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, a number of different strands, which I'm going to touch upon, the first kind
[Amit Varma]: of observation I'm going to make is that, yeah, of course, I agree with you that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there are cycles and history if it doesn't repeat at least rhymes, as someone said, but
[Amit Varma]: a counter view to that would comes from what Jonathan Haidt said somewhere when he sort
[Amit Varma]: of spoke about, you know, how there is, for example, imagine an equilibrium of the laws
[Amit Varma]: of physics, everything is as it is, and that is why the world exists.
[Amit Varma]: And gravity is exactly, you know, this is a force and everything, you know, it's almost
[Amit Varma]: as if the perfect conditions for us existing as we are does and then suddenly, one of those
[Amit Varma]: constant changes completely say the law of gravity changes completely, you know, which
[Amit Varma]: would obviously change the world completely change our lives completely, you know, depending
[Amit Varma]: on how much gravity changed by whether we would exist or not.
[Amit Varma]: And his point is that social media changed something fundamental around the year 2007,
[Amit Varma]: 2008.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, very briefly, for the benefit of the listeners, the thesis is that, as the
[Amit Varma]: Twitter's retweet button and like button and Facebook's share button, essentially, with
[Amit Varma]: the instant gratification of validation that they brought did two things.
[Amit Varma]: One is they made the discourse much shallower because of the nature of the form.
[Amit Varma]: And B, they made it far more performative, where simultaneously you lose depth because
[Amit Varma]: you're restricted to 140 characters, 280 characters, and secondly, you are getting validated for
[Amit Varma]: everything you say.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that validation becomes a question itself.
[Amit Varma]: And there is even a notion that it is this kind of need to constantly be performative,
[Amit Varma]: that has led to, you know, all kinds of mental health problems as well, where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in America, he speaks about how, you know, teenage girls, instead of interacting with
[Amit Varma]: each other in a normal person to person social way, their social lives have been taken over
[Amit Varma]: by social media, where it's brand management, they're having to do all the time, which,
[Amit Varma]: you know, has its consequences.
[Amit Varma]: So my sort of question here is that, you know, don't you think that in this exacerbation
[Amit Varma]: of these human traits, as it were, which is what social media has led to, it amplifies
[Amit Varma]: everything about us, both the good and the bad, that that can be a problem?
[Amit Varma]: And two, do you think that this form of this course matters, like, you know, it's a strong
[Amit Varma]: thesis of mine that whatever form you choose to write in will shape your content, and therefore,
[Amit Varma]: it will shape your character, that if for example, if I do three hour podcasts, I am
[Amit Varma]: delving deeply and having deeper conversations and thinking more deeply about those subjects.
[Amit Varma]: And that shapes me as well.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas if I was doing like five minute nuggets, and I was asking shallow questions, and I
[Amit Varma]: had to cater to the lowest common denominator as news television did, that would shape my
[Amit Varma]: content shape the discourse and shape me as well.
[Amit Varma]: So form can change, content can change people.
[Amit Varma]: Your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: So on the first point, which you mentioned about, you know, history repeating or sometimes
[Guest]: actually being a discontinuity.
[Guest]: Yeah, I agree.
[Guest]: I mean, I think there are events in history, there are platforms and there are things that
[Guest]: happen in history, which are clear discontinuity.
[Guest]: And in some sense, I would agree, I mean, Gutenberg's press was a discontinuity for
[Guest]: sure.
[Guest]: And, you know, we saw what happened because of that, I mean, protestant movement would
[Guest]: not have started.
[Guest]: I mean, Martin Luther, everything that he wanted to say spread around because of Gutenberg's
[Guest]: printing press.
[Guest]: And therefore, the protestant movement and the protestant work ethic and everything followed
[Guest]: from there.
[Guest]: And in some ways, this ability to, you know, connect socially in a manner where you could
[Guest]: have, you know, a million people listen to what you have to say and your sound bite is
[Guest]: a discontinuity.
[Guest]: So I'm, I wouldn't say that some platforms of the kind that we see today in Twitter and
[Guest]: Facebook are in any way sort of repeat of a previous pattern, except for the fact that
[Guest]: something like this has happened 500, 600 years back, but in a very different way and
[Guest]: form.
[Guest]: Now, you know, those platforms do change how we actually have the discourse because, you
[Guest]: know, you are right.
[Guest]: If you have to have, you know, a space of 140 or 280 characters, you will choose a form
[Guest]: of communication that suits that medium.
[Guest]: And Amit, you write and you teach writing, you know this and you teach people about this,
[Guest]: that you have to fit your writing to the medium and you have to both optimize for the reader
[Guest]: as well as what, you know, the form that you're writing.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I completely agree with you.
[Guest]: Even in my case, you know, I do a lot of corporate writing and if you ever see my corporate writing,
[Guest]: you will like, listen, what is this?
[Guest]: I mean, why are you writing this in this manner?
[Guest]: This is clearly written to obfuscate and my simple, I would plead guilty because that's
[Guest]: the whole point of writing that particular, you know, note is to obfuscate, is to have,
[Guest]: you know, plausible deniability one month down the line, is to sometimes say something
[Guest]: which you don't often intend to say in indirect forms.
[Guest]: So there is a form that, you know, that actually changes and alters the way you want to, you
[Guest]: know, communicate.
[Guest]: And I fully understand and appreciate that even some other instance of mine, I used to
[Guest]: dabble in stand-up comedy, I mean, about six, seven years back, and it had become a bit
[Guest]: of a passion.
[Guest]: So, you know, Three Wise Monkeys or wherever I used to be hanging around in, at that time
[Guest]: I was in Bombay for some time.
[Guest]: And I realized that people are just absolute geniuses, you know, to be able to do the amount
[Guest]: of, you know, content, the wit, the, you know, the sarcasm in a, in a three minute piece.
[Guest]: It's just amazing.
[Guest]: I mean, later you wouldn't even remember what was the joke, but at that point in time for
[Guest]: three minutes, they were just fantastic.
[Guest]: When you contrast that with, you know, thousands of pages of Yes Minister and Yes Prime Minister,
[Guest]: you know, it's very different, but both give you, at least to me, both gave the same level
[Guest]: of, you know, humor and joy.
[Amit Varma]: So I agree with you on this.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I didn't realize that Rego Jetly was also a standup comedian.
[Guest]: We discover new things every day.
[Guest]: That amount of filmy knowledge had to come in use somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: Filmy knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So we spoke about discontinuities and we spoke about history repeating or rhyming.
[Amit Varma]: And I want to go to one aspect in which it seems like we have seen all this before.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, there's a book Walter Lippmann wrote called Public Opinion, where
[Amit Varma]: the name of the first chapter is something like the world as it is in the picture in
[Amit Varma]: our heads, where he points out the difference, the impossibility of ever knowing the real
[Amit Varma]: world because it's so complex.
[Amit Varma]: If I remember that first chapter starts out with the story about how after World War One
[Amit Varma]: ended, you know, even after it had ended four days, five days later, fighting was going
[Amit Varma]: on in some places and people were dying because the news hadn't reached them.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, effectively the World War One had ended, but it hadn't kind of ended everywhere
[Amit Varma]: in a manner of speaking.
[Amit Varma]: And that sort of dichotomy between the real world as it is, which is complex and unknowable
[Amit Varma]: and the worlds that we construct individually in our heads, that's a feature of the modern
[Amit Varma]: time as well, where narrative control is everything.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in, you know, one of your newsletter editions, you spoke about demand and supply
[Amit Varma]: in politics and ideas, where at one point when you were talking about the newsletter,
[Amit Varma]: you wrote, quote, the focus of this newsletter is to make public policy accessible to the
[Amit Varma]: public.
[Amit Varma]: This is a claim we often make around here.
[Amit Varma]: There are think tanks and public policy specialists to advise those who are in power.
[Amit Varma]: We are at the other end of the pipe, trying to influence the demand side of the market
[Amit Varma]: of democracy.
[Amit Varma]: The hope is that an aware and an enlightened public will demand better from their representatives.
[Amit Varma]: Once a pattern of demand changes, supply will adjust itself.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you refer to the Lipman versus Dewey debates as an example of the wisdom of doing this
[Amit Varma]: or the futility of doing this.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit more about your thinking behind this and why you are more on Dewey's
[Amit Varma]: side than Lipman's.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I think firstly, you know, there are two ways of influencing public policy, like you
[Guest]: just quoted what I had written there.
[Guest]: And a lot of focus of the think tanks actually is on the, is on focusing on the supply side
[Guest]: of the equation.
[Guest]: Our view is that you can do that thing on the demand side, it takes time and it requires
[Guest]: a lot of effort.
[Guest]: We are over a hundred editions down and, you know, we will continue.
[Guest]: And my, you know, small hope is that even if 10,000 people, you know, change their opinion
[Guest]: or I would not say change their opinion or are informed better, you know, that's a success
[Guest]: because I really don't think I have the ability or the access to actually change the opinion
[Guest]: of a lawmaker or someone who actually, you know, makes the public policy.
[Guest]: But coming back to, you know, the Lipman-Dewey debates and, you know, in some sense it was
[Guest]: at the back of my mind when I spoke to Pranay about this and Pranay wanted me to start writing
[Guest]: as well because Pranay came at it with the same view that we should influence the demand
[Guest]: side of the equation.
[Guest]: But let's go back to Lipman and Dewey and the debate.
[Guest]: You know, it's a fascinating book that it's a great book.
[Guest]: And what Lipman says is that, you know, when democracy and he takes the American example
[Guest]: and he says that when, you know, just when democracy was, you know, the American state
[Guest]: was founded, most of the people who came representing their, you know, their provinces or their,
[Guest]: you know, constituencies, they knew their people really well because these were agrarian
[Guest]: sort of setups.
[Guest]: People came from there.
[Guest]: They had very clear idea about what their people wanted.
[Guest]: And the people also had very limited sort of views about what they wanted, right?
[Guest]: I mean, their world was just the village, you know, and the farming they did or the
[Guest]: cattle they kept.
[Guest]: And this is in early 20th century, Lipman had already reached a conclusion that this
[Guest]: original thesis no longer holds because people have, I mean, the cities have come up, people
[Guest]: are so different, they are doing different kinds of occupation.
[Guest]: And so his view was that firstly, people do not have a full picture of what the world
[Guest]: around them is like, right?
[Guest]: They are only seeing, you know, some narrow sort of through their windows, they're seeing
[Guest]: a part of the world.
[Guest]: And because they're seeing a part of the world to have to depend on them to have a full view
[Guest]: of what kind of a polity would they want to, what kind of laws would they want is almost
[Guest]: futile.
[Guest]: And because they carry this picture in their mind, you know, people can be, you know, narratives
[Guest]: can be built around those images that they carry in their mind.
[Guest]: And those narratives then can be used and is used by politicians to actually win elections.
[Guest]: And Lipman was worried that this is a fatal flaw of democracy.
[Guest]: And so for him, the idea was that, listen, there has to be an intervention of experts
[Guest]: somewhere and experts have to come in, experts have to actually intermediate between this,
[Guest]: you know, masses of people who actually form the, you know, the electorate and who actually
[Guest]: elect people.
[Guest]: And, you know, the experts have to, in some sense, you know, filter the requirements and
[Guest]: the needs of these people.
[Guest]: And in some sense, mediate between the lawmakers and the public.
[Guest]: And you know, just that idea is not, is revolting to me that somebody should come in as a set
[Guest]: of experts.
[Guest]: But Lipman was very convincing in this.
[Guest]: And you know, the idea that we all have an imagined world in which, you know, around
[Guest]: in our minds and all, it's very powerful out of that, it's true also.
[Guest]: Do we, who actually, you know, was admired Lipman and he said this is, I mean, as a concept
[Guest]: it's great, but his argument was, we should not be giving up this fight so easily.
[Guest]: And his point was, listen, there is something which is the knowledge of the collective.
[Guest]: And the collective often has a view, which actually, if you sort of, you know, if you
[Guest]: are able to use it well, is, will give you much better results than the view of the experts
[Guest]: and will actually lead to much more sustainable change in the society if you know how to sort
[Guest]: of harness it.
[Guest]: And therefore, his point was, don't give up on it.
[Guest]: And this is like that old, you know, debate, Amit, between methodological individualism
[Guest]: versus methodological collectivism.
[Guest]: It's like, you know, Durkheim, there is a collective conscience and that works.
[Guest]: But Dewey's point was work on this side, make people aware, improve their sense of understanding
[Guest]: of what's happening around it.
[Guest]: And then, you know, harness the collective knowledge and the collective sort of wisdom
[Guest]: of the people, and then feed it back into the political system for effecting a change.
[Guest]: And, you know, I fall on the Dewey side, and that's why the newsletter is aimed at, we
[Guest]: never address any sort of political or any think tank or any sort of, you know, political
[Guest]: party or anything, our audiences squarely, the people, India, outside India, wherever.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, and that resonates with me a lot, because I think when I won my last Bastia
[Amit Varma]: Prize in the prize winning speech also, I referred to the same thing about how we need
[Amit Varma]: to think about the demand side of the political marketplace, not the supply side, because
[Amit Varma]: everyone responds to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Your supply side doesn't give a shit about, you know, what random experts may say they
[Amit Varma]: respond to either the special interest groups who are lobbying them on the one hand, or
[Amit Varma]: to voters.
[Amit Varma]: So the best way to make change happen is to actually change the mind of people at large,
[Amit Varma]: which is also, you know, a larger sort of foundational battle within the Indian Republic,
[Amit Varma]: which we'll come back to later.
[Amit Varma]: But my question sort of here is that, at some point, I felt that this might not be something
[Amit Varma]: which is say, within the reach of somebody like me, and therefore, by extension, someone
[Amit Varma]: like you, because we're writing in English.
[Amit Varma]: And because in India, it's just a narrow sliver of people who will be reading this kind of
[Amit Varma]: thing in English.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, one can argue and say that, listen, history is made by elites after all.
[Amit Varma]: So if you can reach enough elites, and change their minds, that does make a difference.
[Amit Varma]: You know, that's a different kind of influence of policymakers and bureaucrats of tomorrow,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps even the politicians of tomorrow.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm not sure how far that goes.
[Amit Varma]: And like, do you think it's like last week, I did an episode with the venture capitalist
[Amit Varma]: Sajid Bhai, who sort of in his mind divided India into India one, India two, India three,
[Amit Varma]: where he said India one was about 100 million people had the per capita income of Mexico,
[Amit Varma]: and spoke functional English with one sliver of that speaking the kind of English which
[Amit Varma]: would allow them to read us and listen to us.
[Amit Varma]: And then there are 100 million people who are in India two who are, you know, plumbers
[Amit Varma]: and Uber drivers, and so on, who basically have the per capita income of Philippines.
[Amit Varma]: And then you have 80% of the country in sub Saharan Africa.
[Amit Varma]: And they are, of course, not reading your newsletter or listening to my podcast.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, if we think deeper, where does the sort of the change come from?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is there a second order thing happening where hopefully, somebody who listens to me
[Amit Varma]: or reads you, you know, becomes a mass entertainer at some point, and those ideas percolate through
[Amit Varma]: that way.
[Amit Varma]: And, I mean, I'm glad that you are optimistic, but what's what's your sense of this?
[Guest]: So I mean, there are, I mean, when you frame it this way, I mean, it's like,
[Guest]: I'm saying, I see that, I mean, let me give you a few examples of what gives me hope,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: There are people who send us mail saying that, listen, I've just cleared the IAS exam.
[Guest]: So, so, and I used to read your, you know, newsletter, I always found it very useful.
[Guest]: I mean, so clearly somebody is going somewhere who might be in a position of actually affecting
[Guest]: real change because of reading this.
[Guest]: And I mean, the other one is you wouldn't believe the number of.edu mail IDs we have
[Guest]: as subscribers.
[Guest]: It's just amazing.
[Guest]: I almost think that every week when I look at the people who are subscribed, I think
[Guest]: a third of it is.edu IDs, you know, so there is clearly interest and these are not, you
[Guest]: know, of course there is a usual, you know, public policy institutions of India from where
[Guest]: people, but the number of people that come from, you know, technology institutes, and
[Guest]: it's a very, very reassuring and very, I mean, it really gives me a lot of, you know, pleasure
[Guest]: and, you know, happiness to see the number of students reading.
[Guest]: So I would tend to believe that there is a second order impact.
[Guest]: The second order impact could be people who, you know, even if they don't go into public
[Guest]: policy, they just might be, you know, working in a regular corporate world, talking to 10
[Guest]: other people, employing three or four people at their homes, you know, or maybe influencing
[Guest]: another five people because of what they do for them.
[Guest]: So I believe that's one way to continue doing this.
[Guest]: Of course, the other way is to start thinking about doing something more in vernacular.
[Guest]: Pranay does that.
[Guest]: He runs a podcast in Hindi, which I think does a lot more than our newsletter in terms
[Guest]: of, you know, how many people actually download it.
[Guest]: Maybe that's also, there is a medium benefit there.
[Guest]: But I think I would still err on the side of optimism because that's the right thing
[Guest]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I agree with you.
[Amit Varma]: And this is really, I think, in a sense, a long game.
[Amit Varma]: And Pranay's podcast Bollyabazi is, of course, awesome.
[Amit Varma]: I have actually been on it talking about Hayek in Hindi, which is possibly the first time
[Guest]: anyone has spoken about Hayek in Hindi.
[Guest]: I've heard that.
[Guest]: By the way, since we are rambling and you mentioned Bastia, let me tell you, I had no
[Guest]: idea about who Bastia was, right?
[Guest]: And I used to read India Uncut.
[Guest]: And that is when I realized that a whole lot of economics that I had read and I had read
[Guest]: a lot of economics had completely bypassed the Austrian school in India.
[Guest]: Totally.
[Guest]: There was not a mention of Hayek or Bastia or anyone from the Austrian school.
[Guest]: I remember distinctly the, you know, the Candlemaker's Plea, which you had written on India Uncut.
[Guest]: And I was like, where is this coming from?
[Guest]: I mean, because I was surprised that there is something completely different sort of
[Guest]: school that I have been, you know, not been informed of at all while studying.
[Guest]: And I have not been taught economics.
[Guest]: I have not taken economics as a part of your curriculum.
[Guest]: But I read up textbooks of economics that were prevalent in Indian schools and colleges
[Guest]: and there was never a single mention of any Austrian school economics.
[Guest]: So that also is an interesting sort of a side note.
[Guest]: And also, you know, a bit of my gratitude for you to have introduced a whole generation.
[Guest]: And that's, again, an important point going back to what you've made.
[Guest]: Somebody is reading it and then somebody 10 years later is writing a newsletter.
[Guest]: So, you know, who knows what are the second order implications of things?
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you'd, you know, you'd earlier mentioned about the need for someone to curate all the
[Amit Varma]: content and all of that, which is out there.
[Amit Varma]: And I see us in a sense as curators of ideas, like I remember at one point when I was writing
[Amit Varma]: India Uncut.
[Amit Varma]: And for those of my listeners who are too young or who may not be aware, India Uncut
[Amit Varma]: is a blog I wrote between 2003 and 2008.
[Amit Varma]: I think in five years, I did about 8000 posts, I do five posts a day.
[Amit Varma]: So I was incredibly prolific.
[Amit Varma]: And then of course, I moved on to play poker professionally and blogging kind of died because
[Amit Varma]: social media disaggregated all its functions.
[Amit Varma]: But I remember receiving a letter from an NRI student, I think in New Zealand or somewhere,
[Amit Varma]: where he said that, please keep doing what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: Because I don't read any Indian newspapers, I don't read anything every morning, the first
[Amit Varma]: thing I do is I go to India Uncut and see, okay, what has Amit posted, because that's
[Amit Varma]: where I get a sense of the country from.
[Amit Varma]: And that's one of the things that motivated me to post in the kind of volume that I did
[Amit Varma]: over the time that I did, because that was gratifying in and of itself.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, the Candlemakers petition, by the way, is Bastia's famous satire against
[Amit Varma]: protectionism, which is a letter from a Candlemaker to the government saying, please ban the sun
[Amit Varma]: because my business is being affected, which is quite, you know, wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, responding to your aside with an aside, that is one reason I'm glad that
[Amit Varma]: like you, I didn't study economics in college, because, you know, my thinking may have gotten
[Amit Varma]: fructified in certain ways.
[Amit Varma]: And I may not have been open enough to be able to discover Bastia and the Austrians
[Amit Varma]: who came after him, Mises Hayek and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, once you discover these people and, you know, read them, it's like a light
[Amit Varma]: bulb goes on in your head, it never kind of goes off again.
[Amit Varma]: And kind of flicking that switch is extremely important to me.
[Amit Varma]: And speaking of flicking switches, I'm also sort of, I want to quote from, you know, another
[Amit Varma]: of your newsletters where you've written a bit about yourself, where, and this is your
[Amit Varma]: 108th edition, so it's fairly recent, you guys have done 110 so far at the time of recording.
[Amit Varma]: And here you wrote, quote, I don't remember when I lost my faith in the ability of the
[Amit Varma]: state to improve the lives of its people, perhaps it wasn't an exact moment.
[Amit Varma]: Growing up, the state was all around me.
[Amit Varma]: I spent most of my childhood in what used to be called a colony, one of the many that
[Amit Varma]: dotted the semi urban Indian landscape in the 80s, a small industrial township whose
[Amit Varma]: heartbeat to the rhythm of the government owned factory at the center of it, my school,
[Amit Varma]: my playground, the hospital, and even the temple were all run by the state.
[Amit Varma]: The state then subsidized a world-class higher education program for me.
[Amit Varma]: At the turn of the millennium, I entered the workforce.
[Amit Varma]: If you had cut me, then I would have bled state.
[Amit Varma]: Over the next two decades, I lost my faith.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good.
[Amit Varma]: Talk to me about this.
[Guest]: Why did you lose your faith?
[Guest]: So I mean, sometimes when you read your, I mean, some, you hear someone reading your
[Unknown]: lines, it's a bit, you're like, okay, what have you written?
[Amit Varma]: But, but I love that phrase.
[Amit Varma]: If someone had cut me, I would have bled state.
[Amit Varma]: That's such a beautiful, vivid way of putting it.
[Guest]: So, Amit, I think there are a few things, see, when you are on the treadmill, right?
[Guest]: You believe that everything that's happening is happening because of you.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And, and I was on that treadmill that a lot of Indian kids have, you know, gone on before
[Guest]: me and everything.
[Guest]: I ticked all the boxes, the right boxes.
[Guest]: And for me, all of this was on account of me because I, in my mind, was a bit of an
[Guest]: underdog everywhere, you know, and therefore I thought that, listen, for an underdog like
[Guest]: me to have done all of this must be me.
[Guest]: And then once I entered the workforce and, you know, you started earning, but you also,
[Guest]: and till you entered the workforce, you actually, you know, when you are growing up, you're
[Guest]: seeing very similar people like you, right, especially if you grew up in a colony as it
[Guest]: was called.
[Guest]: And then you went to college and you saw fairly similar people and, you know, if you went
[Guest]: to the right colleges and the right schools and things of that kind, you just saw people
[Guest]: like you.
[Guest]: In the workplace was the first time when I started seeing a little bit more diversity
[Guest]: or whatever it is worth for the kind of places that I worked.
[Guest]: And then, you know, I started hiring people, I mean, in large numbers.
[Guest]: And then, you know, you started going to other places and, and gradually I started realizing
[Guest]: that, listen, firstly, this is not all on account of you and, you know, just your talent
[Guest]: and enterprise.
[Guest]: There is a privilege that you are born to.
[Guest]: And the realization was not just that there is a privilege that you are born to, but that
[Guest]: privilege is of the kind where the state becomes a force multiplier in your life.
[Guest]: If you are born in the right place, then the state is, you know, helping you like nobody's
[Guest]: business.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And whereas if you are born by the lottery of your birth, if you are in the born at the
[Guest]: wrong place, then there is no state there for you to be sort of, you know, for you to
[Guest]: get anything.
[Guest]: And I saw this contrast many times over in the, you know, just the first decade of my
[Guest]: work.
[Guest]: And once you sort of like, like you were mentioning, you know, the Austrian school, once you have
[Guest]: seen it, you can't unsee it, you know, to sort of make a pun on the, on your show.
[Guest]: And then I just couldn't unsee it.
[Guest]: It was all around me that, you know, why is this not here?
[Guest]: I mean, in the sense of why is this guy not getting the right education?
[Guest]: Why is there no proper hospital here?
[Guest]: You know, why doctors are not there in just, you know, 50 kilometers outside of a metropolis.
[Guest]: You know, all of those questions started, you know, in some sense, gnawing at me.
[Guest]: And if you are a bit sort of, I would say reflective, which I am both observant and
[Guest]: reflective, then you can continue being on the treadmill and do all the stuff that you
[Guest]: have to do in corporate life or wherever you're working.
[Guest]: But this thing keeps coming back to you, that, you know, this is a privilege and this is
[Guest]: a privilege of a very specific kind where the state actually, you know, was benevolent
[Guest]: because of where, you know, because of the privilege that you are born with.
[Guest]: And that's what I wrote in that episode that, in that edition, that the state was simultaneously
[Guest]: for me omnipresent when I was growing up.
[Guest]: And then I realized for many people, for a large swath of, you know, Indian populace,
[Guest]: it was omniabsent, it was never there.
[Guest]: And this, you know, simultaneous omnipresence and omniabsence is what, you know, really
[Guest]: riles me.
[Guest]: And, you know, why does it have to be this way?
[Guest]: I mean, you can do, and there is in some sense, there is both these strands of writing, this
[Guest]: useless omnipresence, you know, place of the state and where it has to be there, the complete
[Guest]: absence of the state.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I couldn't agree with you more.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, like I know both of us will agree, the Indian state is simultaneously
[Amit Varma]: too small and too large, it's too small in the sense that it doesn't fulfill its essential
[Amit Varma]: functions properly, like the rule of law, which I think for most poor people in this
[Amit Varma]: country is absent, if not for almost everybody, in fact.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, it does too many things which it should not be doing and in many ways
[Amit Varma]: is almost predatory and parasitic presence, like I like to say, suitably alliterative.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of, you know, now talk a little bit about the state, especially the Indian
[Amit Varma]: conception of the state.
[Amit Varma]: And again, what I want to do here with you is a conception of the state has something
[Amit Varma]: to do with our circumstances at the time that we gained independence, where again, I'll
[Amit Varma]: quote from one of your pieces, which is from the newsletter number 28, in fact, where you
[Amit Varma]: write, quote, that the newly independent India needed to change wasn't ever in doubt.
[Amit Varma]: The colonial rule had drained it economically.
[Amit Varma]: Its society was driven with ancient caste prejudices and practices.
[Amit Varma]: The enlightenment values of liberty, freedom, and equality that philosophically underpin
[Amit Varma]: the Western democracies were difficult to root in the Indian intellectual or social
[Amit Varma]: context.
[Amit Varma]: Democracy with equal rights to all citizens was therefore an audacious gamble, but we
[Amit Varma]: chose that radical end.
[Amit Varma]: All that remained was what means we should adopt to change India, a stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And here, of course, as you go on to point out that there were people who said that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the state needs to change society in a top down way and Nehru and Ambedkar were
[Amit Varma]: for that.
[Amit Varma]: And there were others like Gandhi, Shyamaprasad Mukherjee, Kripalani, who said that, no, you
[Amit Varma]: got to change society first, otherwise, it's not going to work.
[Amit Varma]: And in hindsight, though, I think, you know, one could have come at this from the first
[Amit Varma]: principles which we both hold where, you know, top down interventions don't necessarily work.
[Amit Varma]: It could be argued that, you know, the top down vision was flawed.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I have often asked, and I think in one of your newsletters, you cited it as well,
[Amit Varma]: that eternal question of was our constitution, a liberal document imposed on an illiberal
[Amit Varma]: society?
[Amit Varma]: And if so, how can the imposition be liberal?
[Amit Varma]: So I've asked that question to so many people, I'd be, you know, actually interested in your
[Amit Varma]: answer as well.
[Amit Varma]: But tell me a little bit about this, after answering this question, tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about this tussle at the founding moment of our republic, and how that led to the conception
[Amit Varma]: of the state that we have.
[Guest]: So, Amit, you know, there are sort of two kind of lenses to take on this one, right?
[Guest]: One is this Benedict Anderson's, you know, imagined community, you know, idea of a nation.
[Guest]: And you know, Anderson says that when a new nation is formed, they have, you know, these
[Guest]: three things that they should ideally be doing.
[Guest]: One is they should be showing that this is, in some sense, a break from continuity, what
[Guest]: we are doing right now.
[Guest]: You know, and that break from continuity is sort of important, because it's important
[Guest]: that you show that there is something new that is getting formed.
[Guest]: Second, especially for those, you know, I would call it notion of a country which actually
[Guest]: had some history, you have to still show some continuum you are still going.
[Guest]: And this is not just something a complete new conception.
[Guest]: So often the European states used a reawakening kind of a construct for this, which is the
[Guest]: second one that you have to show that it is break, but it is in some sense a reawakening.
[Guest]: And third, then you have to bring historians to construct this sort of story, which sort
[Guest]: of fits all our past events into this sort of, you know, this kind of ideas.
[Guest]: And I'll ramble a little bit, so just give me a minute, I'll come to your point.
[Guest]: So that's one way of looking at it.
[Guest]: And I think we followed it to the T. We said this is, you know, I mean, this is absolutely
[Guest]: a new thing.
[Guest]: He, like Nehru said in the, you know, Trust with Destiny, he actually used India awakens
[Guest]: when the whole world is asleep, India awakens to freedom.
[Guest]: And therefore, you know, there was an absolute sort of right there.
[Guest]: He uses exact words that Andersen mentioned.
[Guest]: And then the historians, which is what today we complain about, of a certain kind went
[Guest]: back and created all of these, I would say created all this, served that narrative.
[Guest]: I think a lot of the narrative is possibly true as well.
[Guest]: But maybe there were a few places where they sort of went a little overboard in order to
[Guest]: make sure that this is a bit of a continuity.
[Guest]: And that's where all of this, you know, whether Tipu is a freedom fighter or Ganga's Omni
[Guest]: Tehzeeb, whether it is real or not, you know, you could argue it till cows come home, but
[Guest]: that was how it was done.
[Guest]: Now, there is a very important line that Andersen makes there where he says that, and I'm possibly
[Guest]: paraphrasing here, that the, you know, the modern concept of this nation has to contend.
[Guest]: I mean, so the it's that the historians view of this modern concept of the nation has to
[Guest]: contend with the, you know, the notion of the antiquity that is there in the minds of
[Guest]: the society, right?
[Guest]: This is what is happening there, that there is a modern concept of this nation which historians
[Guest]: are trying to sort of now create, but it has to contend with the, you know, the deeply
[Guest]: felt belief that this is a more ancient, you know, sort of a land than what it was.
[Guest]: And that is, you know, that is the fault line, if you were to ask me, right?
[Guest]: How much should we have gone, you know, on this spectrum?
[Guest]: And I think in that sense, and a lot of people, other people have also mentioned, I think
[Guest]: the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi was a very, very pivotal sort of a, you know, thing
[Guest]: in this entire thing, because when he was there, I think there was a strong force that
[Guest]: maintained some amount of, you know, you know, got a lot of both political as well as moral
[Guest]: force on the other side, that we need to maintain a certain sense of continuity.
[Guest]: And the idea that ours is an antique land, whereas, you know, Nehru and Ambedkar coming
[Guest]: at it very differently, Nehru coming at it from his Fabian socialist, you know, background
[Guest]: and you know, whatever he had seen, and, you know, in Europe and the enlightenment values
[Guest]: and things of that kind, his view was that, listen, this, if you go into the society,
[Guest]: you will realize that this society stands no chance in terms of modernizing itself,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: Because it is so riven with so many prejudices and so many, you know, is that it is not possible.
[Guest]: And Ambedkar, nobody need to tell Ambedkar about that, you know, he knew it, he felt
[Guest]: it from within, he had seen it.
[Guest]: So from both of them, this was clear, you know, opportunity for the state to affect
[Guest]: social revolution, right?
[Guest]: And I think the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi really, really crippled that other sort of,
[Guest]: you know, movement totally, because in some sense, when Gandhi said that Congress had
[Guest]: to be disbanded, which often today we get in WhatsApp as if, you know, Gandhi was saying
[Guest]: that this Congress is a bad Congress or whatever, his idea was that, listen, we have not completed
[Guest]: the task of independence.
[Guest]: What we have completed is the task of getting, you know, over the colonial rule, but it would
[Guest]: be an absolute disaster if you just replace one set of colonial masters without changing
[Guest]: anything dramatically within the society and replace it with another state, which exactly
[Guest]: takes over the entire apparatus and continues to do the same thing with a different name,
[Guest]: right?
[Guest]: But that assassination crippled it and then what happened is whoever were the true Gandhians,
[Guest]: they had to make a choice.
[Guest]: Some of them like Kriplani, you know, Acharya, Vinoba Bhave, all these guys, you know, went
[Guest]: into the sort of the Gandhian way into the villages and try to do some, you know, Navnirman,
[Guest]: not Navnirman, whatever, Sargodaya and things of that kind.
[Guest]: Whereas the others were like, listen, we have to, you know, we have to be where the state
[Guest]: is and we'll try and do this particular change.
[Guest]: And I think that, you know, that balance or whatever, I mean, that adequate rigorous debate
[Guest]: at that point in time that we missed because two, you know, titans, Nehru and Ambedkar
[Guest]: were both on this side, meant that we in some sense thought that we will get over this problem
[Guest]: and that, you know, if the state continues for a period of 50 years of running its agenda
[Guest]: of social revolution from outside, we will never again, you know, need to, I mean, we'll
[Guest]: get over that hump.
[Guest]: I mean, the society will change.
[Guest]: But like now we are discovering, it doesn't change, you know, it's top down, centrally
[Guest]: planned things just don't happen that way.
[Guest]: And this is where again, again, this is that old Rousseau and, you know, a whole lot of
[Guest]: these guys who believed in society as a sort of a, you know, place where everything starts
[Guest]: from.
[Guest]: I think again, you can ask that question, whether these, I mean, these guys are right.
[Guest]: And this is what one of my points is that, you know, methodological individualism is
[Guest]: good in economics sphere, but when you have to run the state, you have to bring collectivism
[Guest]: into it, not as a notion of economic sort of, you know, means, but definitely as a collectivism
[Guest]: in the sense of how you change the society, right, it can't be just a top down idea that
[Guest]: some one guy does, you know, and we then change the, you know, school curriculum and everything
[Guest]: to say, this is what we are.
[Guest]: But when the guy comes back home, his parents say, this is not what we are, right?
[Guest]: You go study in school, all of us are equal.
[Guest]: There is no casteism, untouchability is a sin.
[Guest]: You come back home and exactly the opposite is happening at your home.
[Guest]: And it's happening, you know, with while having the pictures of Nehru and Gandhi in your drawing
[Guest]: room.
[Guest]: I mean, that sort of dissonance we lived with, and those chickens have come home to roost.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, it sort of strikes me that, you know, now when we look back with the benefit
[Amit Varma]: of hindsight, the sort of top down status thinking that came from Nehru, where it failed
[Amit Varma]: is obvious in the domain of economics, where it is pretty much seen and I think there is
[Amit Varma]: consensus on that, that it failed utterly and kept India poor for many decades.
[Amit Varma]: But where it is not so evident is in terms of social change, because you don't know counterfactuals
[Amit Varma]: and there can be arguments made that we would have been worse off if not for this and so
[Amit Varma]: on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But a lot of this is sort of striking because that fear of replacing one set of rulers with
[Amit Varma]: another is essentially what happened.
[Amit Varma]: We took over the entire colonial apparatus that the British left behind.
[Amit Varma]: We kept the Indian Penal Code, which was put in place to govern the natives as it were.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, and I did an episode with Tripur Dhaman Singh, where he spoke about the First
[Amit Varma]: Amendment to our Constitution.
[Amit Varma]: And when you read it, you realize that, you know, you spoke of Nehru's enlightenment values,
[Amit Varma]: but Nehru is incredibly illiberal in that.
[Amit Varma]: And Shyama Prasad Mukherjee comes across as a great liberal in that.
[Amit Varma]: You know, today we speak about all these activists arrested under the sedition law.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, the sedition law was made unconstitutional in 1950, Nehru brought it back with the First
[Amit Varma]: Amendment.
[Amit Varma]: So this is something that, you know, people need to pay attention to that, which is not
[Amit Varma]: to necessarily demonize Nehru or, you know, agree with the current dispensation that everything
[Amit Varma]: is Nehru's fault.
[Amit Varma]: Nehru was a great man.
[Amit Varma]: He did a number of great things, but people contain multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And this shit really went down.
[Amit Varma]: And the importance of looking back on it is kind of identifying, you know, instead of
[Amit Varma]: identifying individuals as heroes and villains, but to talk about what structures of the state
[Amit Varma]: have sort of let us down.
[Amit Varma]: And again, you mentioned sort of the project of shaping our history.
[Amit Varma]: And I did an episode with Kapil Gomireddy where he spoke about this at length as well,
[Amit Varma]: where he spoke about how you had all these historians sort of presenting a particular
[Amit Varma]: vision of history, you know, with noble intent or whatever, but it backfired because society
[Amit Varma]: remembers and what seems to have happened today in a manner of speaking is that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, your politics has caught up with society.
[Amit Varma]: Society didn't change.
[Amit Varma]: Eventually, once society got empowered enough, it is a politics that's changed and that's
[Amit Varma]: sort of brought us to where we are.
[Amit Varma]: You also had, you know, an interesting
[Guest]: Sir, I mean, one, if I were to ramble a little bit and ask you a question, right.
[Guest]: So, you mentioned that, you know, did we fail or not as part of Nehru's sort of social agenda
[Guest]: and the idea of what his social sort of views were and, you know, everything that we spoke
[Guest]: about.
[Guest]: And your point was, we don't know what are the counterfactuals, right.
[Guest]: One way to sort of argue about this is how did others make this transition, right.
[Guest]: So, if I were to sort of put this point or this sort of, you know, hypothesis that, for
[Guest]: instance, the transition of England from, you know, agrarian traditional feudal society
[Guest]: into a modern state, you know, how did the social change happen there?
[Guest]: And somewhere, maybe, I don't know what's your view about this, but this whole thing
[Guest]: about the protestant movement, you know, coming along with what Locke was saying at that point
[Guest]: of time about inalienable rights, about the primacy of the individual, protestantism saying
[Guest]: that was the God will only, you know, be happy with you because it's already predestined,
[Guest]: you know, and that's the big sort of message of protestant Calvinism was predestined.
[Guest]: Then what do you do?
[Guest]: This is the moral sort of thing that you have to follow, that everything is predestined.
[Guest]: And then the idea with Locke and others brought into play was, listen, it is predestined,
[Guest]: but if you do well in your life and you succeed and the success is God's sign that your predestination
[Guest]: is good.
[Guest]: You know, some such, you know, broad kind of a notion.
[Guest]: And that's how the society sort of took the idea of individual liberty and things of that
[Guest]: kind strongly.
[Guest]: Is that, I mean, what's your view on this?
[Guest]: I mean, did that happen through an organic social process rather than a top-down process?
[Guest]: And did we just not have, we have just missed that boat altogether or that bus altogether
[Guest]: because there is no reconciliation between some of our, you know, really core held beliefs
[Guest]: versus what political philosophy we want actually to espouse for a country like ours?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a difficult question for me to answer.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, first of all, in the context of England, I simply don't know English history well enough
[Amit Varma]: to be able to comment on that with any degree of knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't want to wing it, but just sort of speculating on the core question within
[Amit Varma]: that, that if you believe in certain values, if you believe in Lockean values, as say,
[Amit Varma]: I do, and I'm sure you do as well, where, you know, the individual rights really matter
[Amit Varma]: and are at the center of everything.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll speak later about the Rawls-Nozick debate, but they would both have agreed on
[Amit Varma]: this central point as well.
[Amit Varma]: Then the question comes up is that say you are in the position of your founders in 1947,
[Amit Varma]: what are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: You can't just leave it to society and whatever, what are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: So my tendency there would be, is to have a bare bones framework, which protects negative
[Amit Varma]: rights in the sense, which protects the right to life, which is against coercion, which
[Amit Varma]: sort of tries to respect the consent of the citizens and treat them as citizens and not
[Amit Varma]: as subjects.
[Amit Varma]: But beyond that, not try to do deeper social transformation, because I think social engineering
[Amit Varma]: can have unintended consequences, which may not work out.
[Amit Varma]: What's your response?
[Guest]: The idea that somebody, it's the same notion of Adam Smith in social science, right?
[Guest]: How can you imagine that you will know the preferences of millions of people and doing
[Guest]: millions of transactions every day, you know, to be able to then arrive at this, you know,
[Guest]: planned thing that this is how I will change.
[Guest]: And listen, economic transactions, you can still believe that there is rationality in
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: You can still take some, you know, solace that maybe in the economic sphere, people
[Guest]: are rational.
[Guest]: In social sphere, people, it's, they're not rational.
[Guest]: I mean, they do not act rationally for sure in social sphere, because, you know, it's
[Guest]: your children, your friends, your relatives, these are the people that are involved.
[Guest]: So and, you know, you had mentioned Jonathan Haidt at the, at the beginning of the episode.
[Guest]: And I, I find that's one of the reasons why I find him very, very interesting to read,
[Guest]: because actually what, you know, Taylor or Kahneman and Tversky did with economics, Haidt
[Guest]: actually did that with social science.
[Guest]: He said, yeah, it's not so rational, this, you know, how you decide on things and how
[Guest]: you arrive at social judgment.
[Guest]: You know, that's why he then came out with this whole idea that the, it's a social intuition
[Guest]: that actually drives a lot of our judgment rather than some rational way of thinking
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: And I think I link it back to that, you know, that famous Haidt article called the emotional
[Guest]: dog and a rational tail, and the idea is that the tail doesn't wag the dog.
[Guest]: The dog will wag the tail and, you know, it's you, the rider on the elephant metaphor that
[Guest]: he gives.
[Guest]: The rider thinks he's controlling the elephant, the rider has no, the elephant is just going
[Guest]: in its way.
[Guest]: The rider is sitting.
[Guest]: Hopefully they will both align in terms of where they will get as they're going.
[Guest]: So I mean, some of these things are quite, you know, in that sense, intuitive, that you
[Guest]: should not attempt some of these things at a macro, you know, large programmatic level,
[Guest]: sitting somewhere in the center and planning for it down the line that this is how we will
[Guest]: change the society.
[Guest]: Fairly dangerous.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, that's where you eventually get into totalitarian instincts.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, question there is where do you draw the line?
[Amit Varma]: For example, someone could easily ask a counter question that, hey, what about something like
[Amit Varma]: Sati?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: You can't say, let society sort it out.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, you know, the state needs to sort it out before women are burnt.
[Amit Varma]: And which is why I would say that I would draw the line at protecting negative rights,
[Amit Varma]: protect individuals, protect their, you know, their right to life, their right to speech,
[Amit Varma]: all of that, you know, remove all coercion.
[Amit Varma]: But beyond that, how far do you want to go to, I mean, do you even have the capacity
[Amit Varma]: to solve social ills?
[Amit Varma]: If you could solve social ills, I would say you must.
[Amit Varma]: But then the point is, you know, that is again what Hayek would have called the fatal conceit
[Amit Varma]: of the state to imagine that it can do everything from the center.
[Amit Varma]: Do you even have the capacity to solve for it anymore?
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, that's the same kind of thought that I'll come to later when we talk about
[Amit Varma]: sort of digital colonialism, as it were, and the power of, you know, Twitter, Facebook,
[Amit Varma]: and all of these people.
[Amit Varma]: And people, you know, often put forward regulation as a solution for all of these guys.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not certain social problems can be so easily solved through state coercion.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll kind of come to that a little later.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and you mentioned Hayek and you've written about him in your 102nd newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: And this sentence from that struck me as very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: So before we get back to the state, I'll sort of ask you about this as well, where you write
[Amit Varma]: quote, regardless of how we define political access in India, left versus right, liberal
[Amit Varma]: versus conservative status versus free marketer, each side arrives at the ideology based on
[Amit Varma]: what they believe is morally right for the society.
[Amit Varma]: What's the basis for our inherent self righteousness?
[Amit Varma]: And why does it differ among people?
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote, and then you talk about, you know, hate saying that we reach a moral judgment
[Amit Varma]: based on our intuitions, which are shaped by, you know, moral and cultural factors and
[Amit Varma]: all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm reminded here of, you know, before we go on to talking about hate, one lovely
[Amit Varma]: book I'd like to recommend to my listeners is called The Three Languages of Politics
[Amit Varma]: by Arnold Kling, where Kling writes about, and he's writing in an American context.
[Amit Varma]: And he's saying that a lot of political discourse becomes people talking past each other and
[Amit Varma]: not to each other, because their priors are different.
[Amit Varma]: So he talks about how progressives will come at everything from a first principle of equality.
[Amit Varma]: Libertarians will come at everything from the first principle of freedom, and conservatives
[Amit Varma]: will come at everything from the first principle of tradition.
[Amit Varma]: And they're all coherent and logical when they come from that first principle.
[Amit Varma]: So you could have two people who are having a completely coherent logical conversation
[Amit Varma]: with each other, but it's not really with each other, because they're starting from
[Amit Varma]: different priors.
[Amit Varma]: And if you really want to have dialogue, you have to address the other person's concerns,
[Amit Varma]: and then talk on the basis of that.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, it's just pointless, it's just noise, it's just echo chambers, which is something
[Amit Varma]: that of course, social media exacerbates.
[Amit Varma]: And he has a sort of similar point where he talks about the five foundations of morality
[Amit Varma]: and how liberals only sort of take two of them into account.
[Amit Varma]: How do you sort of place all this in a context of India, like what sort of the bedrock of
[Amit Varma]: our moral instincts, so to say, and where does it become a problem for, say, a particular
[Amit Varma]: idea of India, which is the liberal inclusive idea of India that privileges individual rights?
[Guest]: It's a difficult one.
[Guest]: Let's take an example, and then try and see if maybe we can take two and two sort of very
[Guest]: different ones.
[Guest]: And let's try and see if I can make any sense of this.
[Guest]: Sometimes, like Amit you say, when you write, you really deeply think about a topic, when
[Guest]: you talk, then you are not, I mean, you have to be really, really good, really fast thinker
[Guest]: to be able to talk with the same level of clarity as you can write, and maybe it's never
[Guest]: possible, at least it's difficult for me.
[Guest]: But let's take this.
[Guest]: So for instance, let's take this real example.
[Guest]: We had a whole lot of articles come out in recent past, Oxfam report and stuff, that
[Guest]: you know, billionaires made a whole lot of money during the pandemic.
[Guest]: And you know, poor people were, you know, given a short shift.
[Guest]: And some, you know, if Jeff Bezos just distributed the wealth that he made during the pandemic,
[Guest]: each Amazon worker would get $80,000 or something, right?
[Guest]: Now let's understand this from this ITN framework, right?
[Guest]: So in India, because of maybe the last 70 years of whatever we have been trained and
[Guest]: maybe before that as well, we view a few things, I mean, that these are our social intuitions.
[Guest]: And one of them is that, you know, that too much of wealth is bad.
[Guest]: We have some, you know, beliefs in moderation and not showing wealth off and things of that
[Guest]: kind.
[Guest]: And also we believe that, you know, people should be somewhat equal and, you know, and
[Guest]: that's the general humanitarian sort of, you know, instinct that, you know, people should
[Guest]: not be dying of hunger, et cetera.
[Guest]: Now you get two trigger events, you know, you get one event that, you know, all these
[Guest]: migrants have walked all the way back and they are not getting jobs and things of that
[Guest]: kind.
[Guest]: And you get this sort of trigger event that, you know, the top three billionaires in India
[Guest]: have added so much of wealth during this time.
[Guest]: Now your social intuition immediately, which informs your judgment is, oh, this is wrong.
[Guest]: You know, how is, how are these guys making all this money when so many people are, you
[Guest]: know, suffering and because of the intuition that you already have, you made the judgment.
[Guest]: And then after that, now, now you are a, you know, privileged guy, you are driving a car,
[Guest]: you are living a life, you've had a good life during the pandemic, but it doesn't strike
[Guest]: to you that, you know, what are you saying?
[Guest]: It is the same thing for that guy who's made, he's not gone out and done something illegal
[Guest]: and without, I mean, with coercion and things of that kind.
[Guest]: If there were no Amazon, the lockdown would have been terrible.
[Guest]: More people would have died.
[Guest]: There was no Amazon, you know.
[Guest]: But you then build a moral scaffolding of reasoning around this judgment of yours, right?
[Guest]: And that scaffolding is in India, very, very easy to build.
[Guest]: It's, you know, we've been trained by our films, books, and politicians, speeches, Garibiya
[Guest]: Dao, all kinds of things to say that was, this is wrong.
[Guest]: Now the problem in what happens is in that framework.
[Guest]: Now this is sort of, you know, intuition, you know, whatever, and then reasoning.
[Guest]: And then we make this reason, persuasion to other people, social persuasion to other people.
[Guest]: We tell these things to others and, you know, all of us sort of gang up and say that this
[Guest]: is a bad idea.
[Guest]: And, you know, that's how you get the Twitter mobs.
[Guest]: The two things that Haidt says actually should happen if you were to be somewhat think deeper
[Guest]: about a topic is what is called private reflection and, you know, and rational sort of reasoning,
[Guest]: you know, the reasoning, your judgment should now be informed by the reasoning.
[Guest]: And those two things don't happen enough.
[Guest]: And it doesn't happen in most parts of the world.
[Guest]: But one of the problems of our sort of, you know, education system and others is that
[Guest]: this private reflection, this idea that we teach you something, you go back and think
[Guest]: about it, and then you don't come back and write exactly what I have told you to sort
[Guest]: of write.
[Guest]: I'll give you a question, you think about it and then write it.
[Guest]: These are all sort of, you know, largely missing.
[Guest]: So, you know, so to your point, I think this, this loop, which comes back around private
[Guest]: reflection or, you know, or a more informed reasoning is a problem and we don't have that.
[Guest]: And you can take the same lens to any other problem.
[Guest]: I mean, you can take that lens to, you know, love jihad.
[Guest]: But you'll find almost the same sort of thing because there is not enough and there is also
[Guest]: not enough discourse in the media, in, you know, these talking head debates that we see
[Guest]: in TV.
[Guest]: There is nowhere this kind of conversation happening where three people are deeply, you
[Guest]: know, having a conversation about, can you think a little deeper that it's not a zero
[Guest]: sum game, like in that sort of, you know, that Oxfam kind of thing, that it is not about,
[Guest]: you know, that somebody's made money by coercing others, that it is fine, that we need growth
[Guest]: for everyone and then we will redistribute, you know, you don't get to that point of conversation.
[Guest]: So I don't know if I've sort of given you some answer, but something of that kind is
[Guest]: just not there anywhere.
[Guest]: It's not there in the way we are taught.
[Guest]: It's not there in the way we have grown up to sort of reflect on things.
[Guest]: And it's not there all around us today in terms of any of the, you know, public forums
[Guest]: where people are debating or discussing issues.
[Guest]: Maybe except a few podcasts like this, there is some time to do this conversation.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You've actually made a couple of separate good points.
[Amit Varma]: One is of course about pedagogy where, you know, the way that we are taught, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we are not taught to think independently enough, though I'm not sure that that alone is, you
[Amit Varma]: know, a sufficient condition for not falling for flawed thinking.
[Amit Varma]: And the other part of it is that a lot of this is just counterintuitive stuff.
[Amit Varma]: Like, obviously, I hardly need to say to my listeners that, listen, number one, a lot
[Amit Varma]: of the wealth that these billionaires gained during the pandemic was notional wealth, you
[Amit Varma]: know, in their stocks or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't really translate to real liquid money.
[Amit Varma]: And the other point is that, you know, in a free market, the only way that you make
[Amit Varma]: money is by making somebody better off.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's a positive sum game.
[Amit Varma]: If all these people made so much money without state coercion being there, it means they
[Amit Varma]: made that many people better off.
[Amit Varma]: And like you said, in different ways, perhaps more people would have died if that didn't
[Amit Varma]: happen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not saying all of the wealth gains are necessarily through, you know, legit free
[Amit Varma]: market ways and positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we don't know what kind of cronyism there might have been at the back of that,
[Amit Varma]: but a significant chunk of that and certainly, you know, Jeff Bezos's wealth going up is
[Amit Varma]: clearly because, you know, Amazon was so incredibly essential during this time.
[Amit Varma]: Bezos is one of the sort of the great visionaries and heroes of our time and to demonize him
[Amit Varma]: the way some people do is kind of absurd.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, before we take a break on the show, let's take a Bollywood break.
[Amit Varma]: You have, you know, we were discussing this sort of conflict between state, society and
[Amit Varma]: markets, you know, the balance between them and you've written eloquently in your newsletters
[Amit Varma]: about how markets were always out because we associated markets with what the East India
[Amit Varma]: Company had done to us with colonialism and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So the fashion of the times when the Soviet Union seemed to be doing well and was admired
[Amit Varma]: by Nehru was that kind of Fabian socialism.
[Amit Varma]: So markets were demonized anyway, and it came down to society and the state.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously the way it panned out, the state took the sort of the bigger role.
[Amit Varma]: But there was a film in the 1940s by B. R. Chopra, which sort of shows that battle playing
[Amit Varma]: out and comes down on the side of society.
[Guest]: So tell me a little bit about that.
[Guest]: So this is a 57 film, one of the great films of the 50s, B. R. Chopra's Naya Daur.
[Guest]: And Naya Daur means New Age, headlined Dilip Kumar and Vaijanthi Mala along with Ajit,
[Guest]: who played his friend who later turns a foe and an absolutely fantastic turn by a guy
[Guest]: called Jeevan, who used to often act in 70s and 60s film as a villain.
[Guest]: Now, you know, I have always been fascinated by this movie for various reasons.
[Guest]: One is this movie is often quoted as, you know, the movie that truly represented Nehru's
[Guest]: view of what India was like.
[Guest]: And my view was either you haven't read Nehru or you haven't seen this film, because this
[Guest]: film cannot be about Nehru.
[Guest]: And people, you know, as great as I think Meghna Desai, when he wrote his Dilip Kumar
[Guest]: biography, he also alludes to, because his biography of Dilip Kumar, if I'm not, you
[Guest]: know, misremembering it, I think it's about, it's called Nehru's hero Dilip Kumar or something
[Guest]: like that.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it's, he believes that Dilip Kumar was a complete manifestation of the,
[Guest]: you know, the Nehruvian sort of liberal image.
[Guest]: Now, in this film, at the heart, and the film starts with a Gandhi quote, by the way, which
[Guest]: in one of the newsletters where I have written, I have actually put that quote.
[Guest]: I mean, I've taken a screen grab of that quote.
[Guest]: Now, at the heart of this film is that there is a small village, there is a temple in the
[Guest]: village, which is very famous.
[Guest]: So and there are Tonga Walas and Dilip Kumar and, you know, his friend Ajit are both Tonga
[Guest]: Walas.
[Guest]: And, you know, people come from different places to visit this village because of the
[Guest]: temple and the local economy largely is built on this, you know, this particular temple
[Guest]: and the business around it, apart from the fact that there are farmers and things of
[Guest]: that kind.
[Guest]: Now, there is a guy in the village who's like the local money lender.
[Guest]: And at the beginning, he goes off to Kashi or somewhere and, you know, leaving behind
[Guest]: his sort of money lending business to his son, who's Jeevan.
[Guest]: Now, Jeevan is shown actually as a Nehruvian elite.
[Guest]: He's studied in the city, had college education, comes back to village.
[Guest]: And he says that, listen, for this village to actually develop, we need a bus to come
[Guest]: into the village.
[Guest]: More business will come.
[Guest]: Now, this is a complete Nehruvian idea that there is a society, you know, these are all
[Guest]: Russian sort of an ideal of farmers under an oak tree doing their business.
[Guest]: Here is a guy who comes and says, let's go by bus.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, this is modernity versus traditionalism.
[Guest]: So these Tonga people say, boss, you can't bring the bus because our business will be
[Guest]: impacted.
[Guest]: And, you know, I mean, had the axis of debate been only this, it was fine.
[Guest]: But that Jeevan is shown to have other, you know, unfortunate sort of, you know, habits
[Guest]: and vices for you to completely not believe in whatever he's saying.
[Guest]: But then what, I mean, eventually there is a fight between Ajit and Dilip Kumar because
[Guest]: of the girl and then Ajit goes into the enemy camp.
[Guest]: And the climax of the film is that, you know, there is a race between the bus and the Tonga.
[Guest]: So this is very similar to a Lagaan kind of a thing.
[Guest]: And the point is, whoever wins the race, they will continue as the primary mode of transport.
[Guest]: The other guy will have to go.
[Guest]: And you know, there is a bridge that has to be built for the Tonga to actually beat the
[Guest]: bus or to have any chance of beating the bus.
[Guest]: And so what happens is then, you know, all kinds of things.
[Guest]: I mean, there are great songs in the film, Ude Jab Jab Zulfe Teri, Opi Nair, and it
[Guest]: will speak, I mean, you know, and, you know, that famous song, Saathi Haath Badhana Saathi
[Guest]: Re, that's when they're building the, you know, the bridge.
[Guest]: So and in the climax, the horse and the man, you know, beat the bus with, you know, all
[Guest]: kinds of hijinks of Ajit, you know, actually putting his body on the line to keep the bridge
[Guest]: from falling down and, you know, the horse going past it, so the society wins.
[Guest]: And my point always is, this is actually an indictment, I mean, this is a complete indictment
[Guest]: of the Nehruvian idea that I will build temples of modern India and I'll bring modernization
[Guest]: into the village.
[Guest]: This is Gandhi.
[Guest]: Gandhi was saying, this is what will happen.
[Guest]: People within the village have to decide for themselves if they believe the Tonga can beat
[Guest]: it, they will build their own bridge and let them beat that, beat the bus.
[Guest]: When they are ready for the bus, they'll be ready for the bus.
[Guest]: In fact, that's what he ends the film with.
[Guest]: Actually the film has a dialogue of Dilip Kumar saying, we are not saying we are against
[Guest]: modernity, but it has to be on our terms when we are ready for it.
[Guest]: So it's a fascinating film, I mean, it captures the debate of that time.
[Guest]: But I think it's the most misunderstood film, if you ask me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, totally.
[Amit Varma]: I totally kind of get that.
[Amit Varma]: And I get the sentiment about someone who says that it represents Nehruvian thinking
[Amit Varma]: has either not understood Nehruvian thinking or hasn't seen the film.
[Amit Varma]: Quick aside, by the way, since we, and tell me what you think about this, because I seem
[Amit Varma]: to be in a little bit of a minority here as far as this particular quibble is concerned,
[Amit Varma]: but when people talk about these three prongs of state, society and market, and I don't
[Amit Varma]: think there are three, I think in a sense there are two.
[Amit Varma]: Because the way I look at it is that on the one hand, you have voluntary action within
[Amit Varma]: society and the market is one of the forms that it takes.
[Amit Varma]: And on the other hand, you have the coercive hand of the state.
[Amit Varma]: And yes, that can sometimes involve controlling a market as well.
[Amit Varma]: But ideally the way you and I think of free markets, for example, it would all be voluntary
[Amit Varma]: action and therefore a part of society itself.
[Amit Varma]: And that, you know, therefore morally virtuous to begin with for that reason, that it is
[Amit Varma]: voluntary and there is no coercion involved.
[Amit Varma]: Like I like to keep saying that, you know, that two people should be free to engage with
[Amit Varma]: each other in any way they deem fit, if they're not harming anyone else, whether it is in
[Amit Varma]: the bedroom or the marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: And because they're both positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: And the irony is that, you know, voluntary action in one domain is frowned upon by one
[Amit Varma]: kind of ideology and by the other in the other domain, which is kind of, and in India, perhaps
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, both domains is frowned upon.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of this, that this distinction of state market society, where to me a market
[Amit Varma]: is just a mechanism for voluntary action and therefore is a subset of society?
[Guest]: See Amit, one of the problems right now is that, I mean, we are just agreeing on everything.
[Unknown]: It's like one of those Bhajjatiya movies, you know, everything is sweet and saccharine
[Unknown]: and you know, nobody seems to have any difference of opinion.
[Guest]: I just hope that the audience or the listeners are not sort of getting tired of this, but
[Amit Varma]: I think many of them will disagree.
[Amit Varma]: So at least there's new things to think about.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, and I didn't know if you'd agree with me because no one else seems to.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I'm hoping that they're finding things interesting, despite some fairly strong overlaps in terms
[Guest]: of some of our world views.
[Guest]: But you know, the reason why I would agree with you, apart from just intuitively, what
[Guest]: you're saying is absolutely right, is also, let's think of people who sort of first wrote
[Guest]: about many of these things, right?
[Guest]: Like Adam Smith.
[Guest]: Was Adam Smith writing about market when he was writing theory of social, of moral sentiments?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: He was writing about society.
[Guest]: I mean, he was like saying, well, what is, you know, how should society be doing things?
[Guest]: And, you know, we have gleaned the idea of an invisible hand for the market from it is
[Guest]: our sort of, you know, what we are extracting out of it.
[Guest]: And we are making this artificial sort of, you know, distinction there.
[Guest]: But a lot of these folks, whether it is Adam Smith or, you know, whether it is Hayek or
[Guest]: even Marx, these guys were not writing economics text or market based text.
[Guest]: They were just writing, you know, society, class, struggle, you know, power and, you
[Guest]: know, things of that kind of what is moral about this.
[Guest]: So I would agree with you that that this distinction is a bit artificial at the heart of it, you
[Guest]: know.
[Guest]: And when you go back into some of the prototypes for some of these things, they are all, you
[Guest]: know, fairly, they just look at society and they just view society and the interactions
[Guest]: that people are doing.
[Guest]: And, you know, economics or market is one sort of branch or whatever, one element of
[Amit Varma]: that.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And on that note of agreement, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Hopefully we'll find things to disagree about after this is over.
[Amit Varma]: So see you on the other side of a break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great joys of this lockdown for me was discovering how much I enjoy teaching
[Amit Varma]: what I've learned over the years.
[Amit Varma]: And my online course, The Art of Clear Writing, is now open for registration.
[Amit Varma]: In this course, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction.
[Amit Varma]: And over the 10 months that I have taught this course, a lively writing community has
[Amit Varma]: formed itself.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: And the March classes begin on March 6.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: That's indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness to work hard
[Amit Varma]: and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley, co-author of the brilliant newsletter, Anticipating
[Amit Varma]: the Unintended.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm not sure if you dear listeners anticipated the unintended, which is that I will now start
[Amit Varma]: the second half off by disagreeing with something that Raghu said before the break, though in
[Amit Varma]: a gentle way, where he referred to Dilip Kumar being called Nehru's hero.
[Amit Varma]: And Raghu's opinion was that no, Dilip Kumar was not Nehru's hero, but okay, maybe not
[Amit Varma]: in this film.
[Amit Varma]: But in general, you have written about Dilip Kumar, you know, elsewhere and spoken about
[Amit Varma]: how he almost embodied the concept of farz, you know, the classic example being the famous
[Amit Varma]: early 80s film Shakti, where he is the honest police officer who ends up shooting his own
[Amit Varma]: son played by Amitabh Bachchan, because he is doing his duty.
[Amit Varma]: And this in a sense, would qualify him to be Nehru's hero for the specific reason that
[Amit Varma]: Nehru's conception of the state and the conception of some of the other founders who believed
[Amit Varma]: in the status vision was, listen, it's true, we are giving the state a lot of power, but
[Amit Varma]: it will be exercised by good people who will do the right thing in general.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you and I know that, listen, power always corrupts and, you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: never quite going to be the case.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about sort of this concept of farz and Dilip Kumar and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: where you went on with this narrative and you wrote about it in your newsletter.
[Guest]: So this is a point that I was sort of wondering about when I was writing that newsletter,
[Guest]: the thing that sort of triggered that was, you know, I just started finding and this
[Guest]: has happened over the last four or five years, that people that we often gave a lot of, you
[Guest]: know, we had a lot of admiration for in society, the judges or the, you know, the IAS officers
[Guest]: and things of that kind, I started noticing that a strange sort of illiberal streak was,
[Guest]: you know, starting to become prominent in many of their, you know, public statements,
[Guest]: judgments and things of that kind.
[Guest]: And I was wondering what is the reason for this?
[Guest]: And, you know, through some kind of convoluted logic, I reached the conclusion that there
[Guest]: was a time when firstly, the people who came into many of these positions, whether you
[Guest]: like it or not, were possibly of a certain state of society, which had a very different
[Guest]: kind of education, etc. for them.
[Guest]: I mean, they were exposed to very different things than the ordinary Indian.
[Guest]: Now that was not necessarily a great thing because people have to come from the real
[Guest]: India in order to solve the problems of real India.
[Guest]: But for a moment, let's assume that these are people who came from these places and,
[Guest]: you know, many times they also appreciated real India.
[Guest]: And then what happened was the state, through its various forms and machinery and everything,
[Guest]: consistently gave them this incentive to do the thing that the state was sort of, you
[Guest]: know, using the constitution for in terms of, you know, effecting a social revolution.
[Guest]: And you saw that all around.
[Guest]: So you would find a very pious man.
[Guest]: And I know many sort of pious IAS officers, judges, extremely pious, extremely religious,
[Guest]: but then they would give judgments, you know, which would sometimes make you question, you
[Guest]: know, I mean, they would really give judgments where their personal sort of, you know, convictions
[Guest]: never got in the way of making those judgments of, you know, giving statements in the press
[Guest]: and things of that kind.
[Guest]: And this always fascinated me and, you know, this movie Shakti where Dilip Kumar was the
[Guest]: father was a good sort of an example of that, where the guy, you know, does what is to be
[Guest]: done.
[Guest]: Some of it is first, some of it is also an overlay of the thing that the state has, you
[Guest]: know, completely trained this person.
[Guest]: You just have to follow what we have told you, because that's the right thing in the
[Guest]: greater sort of interest of the society.
[Guest]: And I then started, you know, noticing that what's happening of late, and again, this
[Guest]: is nothing to do with the specific government, but it's the point that we made earlier, you
[Guest]: know, that other sort of, you know, experiment, if you might call so, of trying to change
[Guest]: the society from top down is fraying completely at the edges.
[Guest]: And therefore, you know, the state has also figured this out, and they are also pandering
[Guest]: to that sort of, you know, that kind of instinct within the society.
[Guest]: And now all of these are in sync, you know, the state also is okay with people, you know,
[Guest]: giving when to their original or whatever their real thoughts are.
[Guest]: Some of those thoughts we might believe are illiberal, are different from what the constitution
[Guest]: or what we thought some of these positions have to possibly take in terms of stand.
[Guest]: And that's, you know, so the incentive now has changed, that's flipped.
[Guest]: And you know, that if it has flipped, then we will get to see more of this kind, you
[Guest]: will get to see more of the kind of judgments where somebody will say that, you know, if
[Guest]: you are molesting someone and the woman still has their clothes on, that's not molestation.
[Guest]: This was a judgment of a couple of months back, or that other one where women's feeble
[Guest]: no cannot be, you know, cannot be construed as no.
[Guest]: So I think somewhere, that's really what sort of animated my thought at that point in time.
[Guest]: And you know, then Shakti was a good vehicle to use as an example of what used to happen
[Guest]: in the past and contrasted with where we are today.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll take a quick aside because you mentioned the feeble no judgment and that gets my blood
[Amit Varma]: boiling and that was obviously in the case of Mahmood Faruqi, who was first convicted
[Amit Varma]: of rape and then he was acquitted by a higher court, which basically said he had done what
[Amit Varma]: he had done and the woman had said no, but it said a feeble no can sometimes mean a yes.
[Amit Varma]: And it acquitted him on this basis.
[Amit Varma]: And it's incredible how so many hypocritical Delhi liberals, so to say, have immediately
[Amit Varma]: rehabilitated him, like they, you know, partially did in the case of Tarun Tejpal and all of
[Amit Varma]: that, where, you know, on the day that we are recording, in fact, the 23rd, he was scheduled
[Amit Varma]: to have performed today at the Jaipur Lit Fest.
[Amit Varma]: And I just want to say in no unequivocal terms that the organizers of the Jaipur Lit Fest
[Amit Varma]: who made this decision, you know, should be ashamed of themselves.
[Amit Varma]: It's a slap on the face of all women.
[Amit Varma]: It's a message to all the women at the Jaipur Lit Fest that your no doesn't mean a no.
[Amit Varma]: It's just disgraceful.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm sorry, this sort of a side of anger apart, because it really gets me going.
[Amit Varma]: And I had an episode also on, you know, how the laws are so weighted against women in
[Amit Varma]: India.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: I think it was with Hamsini Hariharan was one of the guests.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, the reason I asked you about, to get back to our topic, before I get carried
[Amit Varma]: away, the reason I asked you about Dilip Kumar and Farzin Shakti and that particular edition
[Amit Varma]: of the newsletter, which was edition number 30, which I'll link, is that I think it makes
[Amit Varma]: an incredibly profound point, which, you know, made me think about this whole issue in a
[Amit Varma]: different way.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to quote you a little bit at length, because I think it'll be of great
[Amit Varma]: interest to my listeners, where you talk about how one quote, the foundational premise of
[Amit Varma]: modern India is that the state is ontologically prior to the society, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then you write, quote, this created an unstable yet desirable equilibrium in India.
[Amit Varma]: The state was founded on values of equality, redistribution, secularism, fairness and social
[Amit Varma]: welfare.
[Amit Varma]: The society from where agents were drawn hadn't fully accepted and internalize these values.
[Amit Varma]: So you had free market economists drafting socialist policies, or an enlightened district
[Amit Varma]: magistrate who preach social equality at work, but practice discrimination at home, stop
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, they are following their incentives, because there is nothing else to do.
[Amit Varma]: The state is the Maibab, as it were.
[Amit Varma]: Now you talk about how liberalization changed this and what happened when liberalization
[Amit Varma]: hit, where you write, quote, the free market incentives aren't the same as that of the
[Amit Varma]: state.
[Amit Varma]: It rewards efficiency and value creation.
[Amit Varma]: For the middle class now, there was no need to live the dichotomous life their parents
[Amit Varma]: led of having a professional code that was different from the personal code.
[Amit Varma]: Liberals are often surprised how well educated professionals working for MNCs turn out to
[Amit Varma]: be bigots.
[Amit Varma]: The answer is simple.
[Amit Varma]: The state couldn't change the society as it had expected.
[Amit Varma]: And once the incentives stop mattering to the citizens, the mask dropped, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you later go on to talk about how the democratic mandate has now changed.
[Amit Varma]: And you go on to write, quote, you can argue the democratic mandate now is for the idea
[Amit Varma]: that society is ontologically prior to the state, stop quote, which is all of which is
[Amit Varma]: kind of fascinating to me.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, it doesn't mean that, you know, I think both of us would agree liberalization
[Amit Varma]: was largely, you know, drastically for the better.
[Amit Varma]: But with the state not being the only source of sort of obedience and adherence, and, you
[Amit Varma]: know, people were empowered in many different ways, which is always a good thing.
[Amit Varma]: But one of those ways was to express their bigotry and to rail against values which they
[Amit Varma]: might have felt were imposed upon them in sort of the national debate.
[Amit Varma]: So let's kind of go back to more sort of, I'm very curious as to what lenses you apply
[Amit Varma]: to look at all of this in a historical sense that fine, I can understand that in an economic
[Amit Varma]: sense, fine.
[Amit Varma]: All the thinking you've done out of it, that forms a lens in the political philosophy sense
[Amit Varma]: that happens.
[Amit Varma]: But in a historical sense, when you look at phenomena like this happening, you know, this
[Amit Varma]: sort of tussle between the state and the society going from one to the other, you know, can
[Amit Varma]: you look because I am really only familiar of this tussle in intimate terms in an Indian
[Amit Varma]: context.
[Amit Varma]: But looking outside, are there lessons that we can take from elsewhere in the world?
[Amit Varma]: And is it something that is, you know, bound to go in particular directions?
[Amit Varma]: What are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: So this will be some really random ramble, I mean, because this, again, the point of
[Guest]: trying to frame this while speaking sometimes is a bit difficult, but let me take a shot
[Guest]: at it.
[Guest]: I think firstly, see this ontologically prior, whether it's state or the society, I think
[Guest]: it's a deep sort of a point, not that I'm making, people have made before it.
[Guest]: And I think there is a view, which is that, listen, the state cannot be ontologically
[Guest]: prior to society.
[Guest]: The society is always there, but what are you trying to do by putting that ontologically
[Guest]: prior to it, right?
[Guest]: And in some sense, you know, Hobbes and others were almost like, you know, it's like a big
[Guest]: bang.
[Guest]: I mean, the society comes together, there is a covenant, and then, you know, they start
[Guest]: forming the sovereign and you know, whatever, but since you asked the historical context,
[Guest]: I think in India, even till 1947, it was very clear that the state had very limited things
[Guest]: to do with society.
[Guest]: I mean, the English did something about it, largely because, you know, their enlightenment
[Guest]: values were so strong that they just could not believe that they will lord over a people
[Guest]: and not bring that enlightenment value to them.
[Guest]: But even then, the idea that what you did at your home, how you conducted your social
[Guest]: life, there was very limited sort of interference from the state.
[Guest]: And if you went just prior to the colonialism, the colonial era, then the state had nothing
[Guest]: to do with how you led your life, right?
[Guest]: And this is actually how India has sort of, you know, lived for a long period of time.
[Guest]: That's why 1947 was a huge aberration.
[Guest]: So you know, even in Arthashastra and you know, Kautilya and Chanakya, when they were
[Guest]: writing, you never found that they were writing about anything where the king's duty extended
[Guest]: to changing the lives of the subjects in how they lead their lives.
[Guest]: And you know, if you have sort of gone through some, I mean, our written history is often
[Guest]: quite poor.
[Guest]: But if you just read a little bit of say, you know, Bhan Bhatta's Harsh Charita, and
[Guest]: you know, this Murthy classic library has actually helped a lot.
[Guest]: And I would recommend people to read a few somewhat dense prose, I mean, you would throw
[Guest]: the book out as part of your writing course as to what is this, even the translations
[Guest]: are so dense.
[Guest]: But one thing that you would notice there is the absolute divorce of the state from
[Guest]: the society.
[Guest]: And the only thing they were interested in was actually some tax collection and going
[Guest]: to war and things of that kind and some very broad civil laws, criminal laws, sorry, around,
[Unknown]: you know, theft and robbery and, you know, all of that.
[Guest]: And, but if you take and that's true of India, now, it's this is true of most feudal societies
[Guest]: and I can take England and we can even take the United States.
[Guest]: And maybe let's take the United States for a moment.
[Guest]: The United States example, the American example was that, you know, there were all these folks
[Guest]: who had come who, you know, one leg was still in the England and they would often go back
[Guest]: and forth, like Washington and all of them.
[Guest]: Where the, you know, the idea that what we are doing as a society was completely driven
[Guest]: by the religion.
[Guest]: The idea that we have to pay taxes was an idea that was an assault on their individual
[Guest]: liberty from a Lockean perspective.
[Guest]: And they fought against it and then they created a state.
[Guest]: Now, when they created that state, then they asked the questions, what should be the, I
[Guest]: mean, you know, how should we create the state?
[Guest]: What should be the ways we should think about it?
[Guest]: The entire constitution is written, not from a perspective of what we should do for the
[Guest]: society, but just how we should make sure that we avoid the trauma that we went through,
[Guest]: where the state was starting to do things that are, you know, completely unjustified.
[Guest]: Now, over a period of time, that constitutional document has been interpreted for all kinds
[Guest]: of social, you know, issues, but that was not the original purpose of that particular
[Guest]: document.
[Guest]: England doesn't have a written constitution, but broadly it's the same sort of a construct.
[Guest]: They didn't write it.
[Guest]: The idea of, you know, creating some kind of a parliament and some kind of a, you know,
[Guest]: constitution, which is not written, but understood is just the idea of making sure that the king
[Guest]: is under the parliament and the parliament is sovereign and takes decisions on many of
[Guest]: these things, but not anything about society.
[Guest]: Now over a period of time, the things, you know, you, you would ask whether gay rights
[Guest]: are right or not, and then you would go back to constitution.
[Guest]: And then you would say that, listen, since they're saying everybody's equal or something
[Guest]: of that kind, therefore, and pursuit of liberty and life and happiness is right.
[Guest]: And therefore these guys also must be given the same thing.
[Guest]: But that's the reason for some of the schisms in those society, because the one section
[Guest]: of the society feels this is not the reason, this is not how the constitution was originally
[Guest]: written.
[Guest]: And, you know, this whole business of trying to back the Supreme court in the U S with
[Guest]: your people.
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of conservatives use this idea called originalism or whatever the idea that
[Guest]: what is the original purpose of a point of what, how it was written.
[Guest]: And they use it to actually say that it was not written for social points, right?
[Guest]: It was written for a very different sort of a reason.
[Guest]: You can't be using that to sort of start sorting out some of the current social points.
[Guest]: Let society solve that in that sense.
[Guest]: So I think large democracies have used, you know, state as a, as a very sort of a, you
[Guest]: know, limited instrument to make sure that we run in a certain way, rather than actually
[Guest]: go out and change society on the back of it.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: Another sort of question that then comes up looking at what is happening now, where if
[Amit Varma]: you are looking at the world through, say the sort of classical liberal perspective
[Amit Varma]: that I'm guessing we share, which makes us inevitably agree on so many things.
[Amit Varma]: It would seem that in some ways we are going backwards, like, you know, Martin Luther King,
[Amit Varma]: of course, had said that the arc of history always bends in, you know, a particular good
[Amit Varma]: direction.
[Amit Varma]: But, and you know, when Fukuyama spoke about the end of history, it was almost as if fine,
[Amit Varma]: you know, liberal values have won, democracies have won, you know, there's a certain set
[Amit Varma]: of values which is now accepted and all of those, all the strife and conflict is behind
[Amit Varma]: us.
[Amit Varma]: And yet you've written recently about, you know, why that end of history never came.
[Amit Varma]: This was in, you know, edition 99, where you referred to a book that I just picked up,
[Amit Varma]: but I haven't read yet.
[Amit Varma]: But you were raving about it called The Light That Failed by Ivan Krastev and Stephen Holmes.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about, you know, what really happened.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, Fukuyama is misinterpreted.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't, it wasn't like, you know, he was saying that we won, it's over.
[Amit Varma]: It wasn't that kind of complacent, whatever his point was much subtler than that.
[Amit Varma]: But, but clearly, even there, you know, there were issues and across the world, we see authoritarianism
[Amit Varma]: on the rise, statism on the rise, instead of getting more globalized, the world is getting
[Amit Varma]: more insular in different ways at the level of how states behave with each other.
[Amit Varma]: So give me a sense of what has happened, what's going wrong, and why are we to believe that
[Amit Varma]: this is that, you know, that what King said about the arc of history was just not true.
[Guest]: So I think, I mean, Amit, you make a very important point.
[Guest]: Very few people get the idea, get the, you know, the fact that Fukuyama didn't mean end
[Guest]: of history, the way people interpret it, what the poor fellow was trying to say, and he
[Guest]: has spent the rest of his life defending or whatever, clarifying what he was saying was
[Guest]: that the idea that a liberal democratic order is the final sort of frontier is established.
[Guest]: Now, you might want, some people will go up to there, some people will regress.
[Guest]: He had no sort of, you know, illusions about that everybody will eventually reach there
[Guest]: or we have already reached there.
[Guest]: His point is, it is now established.
[Guest]: Then there was a contestation between this order versus the, you know, whatever the communist
[Guest]: totalitarian, whatever you might call it, that this order is the final one, not the
[Guest]: other one.
[Guest]: Now you might want to, you know, on that scale, you might want to go from zero to 10 and back
[Guest]: again to zero.
[Guest]: It's your choice.
[Guest]: Now what is the reason for what happened, at least according to this book and, you know,
[Guest]: some of it sort of resonated with some of the earlier editions as well that I've written.
[Guest]: And this is a bit of a, you know, a subject that sort of has been in my mind and there
[Guest]: are multiple different ways I've come to this point in various editions.
[Guest]: I think one thing that these guys make a very important point is that they call it cheap
[Guest]: imitation.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: And that is to say that you came to this, you know, you concluded that liberal democratic
[Guest]: order is the final one.
[Guest]: And then to many other places, and especially they take Eastern and Central European countries
[Guest]: that came out of the Soviet bloc and then adopted some of these forms of government.
[Guest]: There, there was no real sort of grassroots, you know, sort of understanding of these things
[Guest]: and, you know, grassroots, you know, sort of intellectual tradition, which actually
[Guest]: built this up.
[Guest]: It was like something was transplanted into these countries.
[Guest]: And I would say not very different from what happened in India.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe we just went through a deeper struggle, a longer struggle, which allowed
[Guest]: us to sort of have way more legitimacy for people who were transplanting these ideas
[Guest]: into India.
[Guest]: But there it was like some World Bank guy would come and sit in a conference room.
[Guest]: Two guys would come from some Brookings Institute, and then they would start writing the constitution
[Guest]: along with a couple of people who studied in Cambridge.
[Guest]: And a lot of these guys, Victor Oban and all, are all educated in, you know, Oxford or Cambridge,
[Guest]: one of those places.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So, this cheap imitation is one part of the problem that you just copied some, and some
[Guest]: of, sometimes the entire constitution is largely sort of, you know, copied and pasted into
[Guest]: this, which I think is a problem because you are not, you know, people will want to locate
[Guest]: their sort of, you know, their intellectual tradition, their history, you know, their
[Guest]: customs, and ask whether this is in some ways consistent with what we are, you know, what
[Guest]: we are actually now going to follow.
[Guest]: So that didn't happen.
[Guest]: It's somewhat similar to this, you know, you had Alex Tabarrok and Shruti Rajgopal and
[Guest]: episode on public policy where our problem was we were doing some cheap imitation of,
[Guest]: you know, a lot of stuff which we should not be doing.
[Guest]: We are way behind on the economic sort of, you know, cycle to start taking some maternity
[Guest]: leave and some environmental issues right now as the, you know, public policy framework
[Guest]: for ourselves.
[Guest]: It's a similar thing.
[Guest]: They took the whole constitution, forget about just taking a few policies and imitating them.
[Guest]: The second was, there is a demographic stress there, right, which is a lot of people who
[Guest]: could get out of those countries got out.
[Guest]: And in some sense in India, this is also true.
[Guest]: I mean, a lot of people who could get out, got out.
[Guest]: And once they went out, they were then forming their own pressure groups, all kinds of things
[Guest]: from there and trying to influence.
[Guest]: And those who remained back, they were just getting more and more xenophobic because they
[Guest]: were now starting to become a minority in the same country.
[Guest]: And in many of these places, there is a real fear that, you know, what is our original
[Guest]: sort of identity is going to get run over because of immigration and things of that
[Guest]: kind.
[Guest]: And then they see that you are now forming, you know, coming to us with a form of government
[Guest]: where these guys, if they stay for five more years, they will become citizens and they
[Guest]: will vote.
[Guest]: And then, you know, then what will happen?
[Guest]: This is again, some of these things also animate our polity at this point in time.
[Guest]: So that's second.
[Guest]: And then the third issue, I think, is also the fact that there was a sort of liberal
[Guest]: triumphalism.
[Guest]: And, you know, then there is no further sort of reflection that, you know, what do we need
[Guest]: to do?
[Guest]: What is the next set of agenda?
[Guest]: And then the GFC happened, the global financial crisis happened, which, I mean, its impact,
[Guest]: I think, is much larger than what people are still, you know, have still written about
[Guest]: and thought about.
[Guest]: I think, you know, all of this, you know, in some form or the other, this populist movement,
[Guest]: Trump and, you know, the Tea Party movement and whatever has happened to the American
[Guest]: conservatives and the American right.
[Guest]: And what is happening in many of these is a belief that that liberalism eventually GFC
[Guest]: showed is that old thing of, you know, socializing losses and, you know, privatizing profits
[Guest]: and, you know, letting people get away, you know, after they having done this.
[Guest]: I think that imprint is very, very strong in many parts of the world.
[Guest]: And there is, therefore, a backlash, which is continuing.
[Guest]: And I think when you combine social media and a whole lot of other things along with
[Guest]: it, it's just, you know, created, I mean, it's just formed a very different sort of,
[Guest]: you know, movement, which I think is a genuine threat to liberalism.
[Guest]: And I think more than I would say even the Cold War threat to liberalism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and the sort of the interesting thing about the GFC also is that, number one, I
[Amit Varma]: think there was a misdiagnosis that a lot of the problems that why that failure happened
[Amit Varma]: have to do with statism, I linked to a great essay by Lawrence White, in my show notes
[Amit Varma]: about all the sort of the distortions, which kind of led to that.
[Amit Varma]: And also, we saw, you know, what I would not really consider would call free markets like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, bailing, like you said, you're socializing losses, privatizing profits, bailing out companies
[Amit Varma]: which are failing is just, you know, creates moral hazard, then you bail out a company
[Amit Varma]: today for failing tomorrow, you're giving an incentive to people to take great risks,
[Amit Varma]: knowing that there is no cost to them for doing so they'll be bailed out.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, which doesn't make any sense at all, I think it's a fundamental tenet of
[Amit Varma]: free markets that companies that fail should be allowed to fail.
[Amit Varma]: And that's another thing that sort of distresses me.
[Amit Varma]: And I know you've written about this, as well is that markets get a bad rap because people
[Amit Varma]: confuse what is good for business with what is good for markets, like I saw someone on
[Amit Varma]: Twitter use the phrase, pro business and free market in the same sentence.
[Amit Varma]: And I was just thinking to myself that dude, these are opposite things.
[Amit Varma]: These are completely opposite things.
[Amit Varma]: What is good for big businesses are bad for people in general, because, you know, what
[Amit Varma]: is good for them is that if you sort of prevent competition to them, you protect their markets,
[Amit Varma]: you create entry barriers, that's not what is good for consumers.
[Amit Varma]: So inevitably, big business will always kind of speak out against free markets.
[Amit Varma]: But this sort of fundamental notion people don't get.
[Amit Varma]: So they look at like a cronyistic system like we've had over so many decades in India.
[Amit Varma]: And we look at the bad aspects of that where state coercion is helping companies, you know,
[Amit Varma]: make money or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And the assumption will be that, oh, look, markets are bad.
[Amit Varma]: But these are not markets, this is not voluntary action, this is a coercive hand of the state.
[Amit Varma]: But that's kind of a little bit of a ramble.
[Guest]: Let's, and I'll come to economics later, but while we are, sure, yeah, go ahead.
[Guest]: You know, like you are, you run this writing course for almost, what now, maybe eight months?
[Amit Varma]: The 10th cohort is going on and I skipped a month in between.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So 11 months, right.
[Guest]: And then you're doing a podcasting thing and you're doing a TikTok.
[Guest]: I'll suggest two courses if you still have time, that you must do.
[Guest]: One is this, you know, just this course on economic reasoning, just because, I mean,
[Guest]: both you have the reach as well as your ability to sort of, you know, demystify some of these
[Guest]: things in a nice and patient manner.
[Guest]: I think what this economic, I see so many people, otherwise well-intentioned, can argue
[Guest]: things and just slip down this path of not being able to think through.
[Guest]: And the second one, since you are a poker player and this, I've been thinking for some
[Guest]: time that I should suggest this to you.
[Guest]: One course on BOSS, just probabilistic thinking, Bayesian reasoning, it's like, it's a must
[Guest]: for almost everyone.
[Guest]: I mean, it's, otherwise people just read so many wrong conclusions, it's just, it's not
[Guest]: funny.
[Amit Varma]: See, Raghu, I got to tell you that you don't know what resonance your words have with me.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like you're reading my mind, like have you hacked into my brain or something?
[Amit Varma]: Because one of the things I'm toying with and I want to do at some point in time is
[Amit Varma]: that my sense is that our education system is not flawed just in terms of delivery, but
[Amit Varma]: also conception, which is why people who come out of our education system don't even have
[Amit Varma]: basic skills.
[Amit Varma]: And these specifically include skills of thinking about the world.
[Amit Varma]: So I've been thinking for a while of putting a course together consisting of essential
[Amit Varma]: things that I think everyone should learn, taught by me and perhaps others, which include,
[Amit Varma]: of course, writing and communication, which include things like financial literacy, which
[Amit Varma]: I am not the person to teach, but it's something everyone should know, logical thinking and
[Amit Varma]: economic reasoning and probabilistic thinking.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, it's almost like you're sort of, you're messing with my brain here, you
[Amit Varma]: know, have you done a phishing scam on my brain or something is what I must ask at this
[Amit Varma]: point.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, I'll come to economics later, and particularly to your father's scooter,
[Amit Varma]: which is a subject of great interest to me.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do that, I want to sort of talk a little bit about nationalism, where you
[Amit Varma]: made a couple of interesting points, and I want to take off of one of them to ask sort
[Amit Varma]: of a broader question.
[Amit Varma]: So at one point where you're talking about the idea of India, you wrote, quote, the real
[Amit Varma]: dividing line on political thought in India has always been nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: This pits one imagination of the Indian nation with another complete with their own imagined
[Amit Varma]: past, a lament of the present and a vision for an ideal nation, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And this is obviously the founders idea of India, as it were, and the current idea of
[Amit Varma]: India of the current dispensation.
[Amit Varma]: And even there, it's not like any one thing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many competing ideas within these ideas.
[Amit Varma]: But my larger question is this, that I think that at some level, given that instinctively
[Amit Varma]: we are hardwired to be tribalistic, to look at the world in terms of us and the other,
[Amit Varma]: would it then be the case that the question just comes down to how do we define the us
[Amit Varma]: and how do we define the other?
[Amit Varma]: And you can define it narrowly or broadly.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the great sort of political successes of the Hindutva movement, and I'm not praising
[Amit Varma]: them, it's success in the way that they have achieved this.
[Amit Varma]: It's not a movement that I have anything good to say about.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the things that they have successfully done is that they've subsumed a lot of identities
[Amit Varma]: within this broad Hindutva identity, which is a remarkable political success.
[Amit Varma]: Like a few years ago, I would have said it's not possible.
[Amit Varma]: We are a country driven by identity politics, divided by identity.
[Amit Varma]: But yet they have created this larger banner of Hindutva, which has subsumed some of them.
[Amit Varma]: And one illustration of this is that in both 2014 and 2019, the BJP got more of the Dalit
[Amit Varma]: vote than anyone else.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they were described by a scholar of the Dalit movements in Prashanth Jha's
[Amit Varma]: book, How the BJP Wins.
[Amit Varma]: I forget the name of the scholar in question, but he called them the default Dalit party
[Amit Varma]: of India.
[Amit Varma]: So they've managed this thing where they've subsumed all of these different identities.
[Amit Varma]: And now the dominant sort of tribal vision, as it were, in India is a BJP's vision of
[Amit Varma]: nationalism.
[Amit Varma]: Now the thing is, if somebody is to say that there are elements of this which are toxic,
[Amit Varma]: because they do the othering of Muslims, because it is, you know, so many regressive notions
[Amit Varma]: are part of it.
[Amit Varma]: If someone is to come up with a competing vision, what is that competing vision based
[Amit Varma]: on?
[Amit Varma]: Because that competing vision cannot, you know, you don't have an ideas based nationalism
[Amit Varma]: happening.
[Amit Varma]: That doesn't appeal at a visceral level.
[Amit Varma]: You can't build a nationalism around liberalism, for example.
[Amit Varma]: I know people think that it's possible, but I am a little skeptical of that process because
[Amit Varma]: people don't have that visceral feeling towards, you know, ideas as they do towards notions
[Amit Varma]: of identity.
[Amit Varma]: What's your response to that?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I think just going back to that point, I think in that particular edition, if I remember
[Guest]: it right, the idea was the Indian state is always statist, conservative, and also in
[Guest]: some sense, you know, socialist, socialist.
[Guest]: And therefore, there is no difference among Indian parties on these grounds.
[Guest]: So the only access is this notion of idea of India or the nationalist idea.
[Guest]: And I think if you have to broaden it, right, like you rightly said, us versus them, I mean,
[Guest]: sometimes it manifests itself in India as nativist, you know, Mumbiker or whatever Maharashtrian
[Guest]: versus non-Maharashtrian and things of that kind.
[Guest]: And then sometimes it manifests itself as nationalist.
[Guest]: And then there is one strand in India, which is internationalist, you know, these guys
[Guest]: who are using toolkits these days, as it is alleged, right.
[Guest]: So I think what the success of the current dispensation is the idea of taking it to the
[Guest]: nationalist identity level, subsuming the nativist and the nativist, I'm not saying
[Guest]: is only region based, nativist is just any identity that is, you know, sub nationalist.
[Guest]: Now your question of what is the competing idea or a competing political force that might
[Guest]: take this on?
[Guest]: I mean, I would rather go the other way.
[Guest]: See there are two things that will happen eventually.
[Guest]: One is, it's like the Carl Schmitt mentioned that, listen, politics is eventually about
[Guest]: friend enemy divide and enemy distinction.
[Guest]: The more agglomerated you make things, you will find that people will look for enemies
[Guest]: because you know, it is in the nature of people to find a competing sort of a view and then
[Guest]: you will split.
[Guest]: And in that sense, it is what happened to Congress, right.
[Guest]: Congress was this sort of a, you know, tent, whatever a huge tent or whatever the term
[Guest]: was for it, and then, you know, everybody came in and everybody, you know, where they're
[Guest]: under it.
[Guest]: And then that agglomeration then eventually started splitting, because there is an idea
[Guest]: that we have to have a friend enemy distinction in order to actually do politics.
[Guest]: Otherwise, what's the point?
[Guest]: So I have a feeling that as opposed to the probability of a competing idea coming over
[Guest]: a period of time, maybe because of lack of personalities of the kind that actually created
[Guest]: this agglomeration, which is true of what happened with Congress as well, the agglomeration
[Guest]: will again split and the people will start looking for competing ideas themselves, right.
[Guest]: And you know, then start going and splitting and doing that now, will that take 10 years?
[Guest]: Will that take 20?
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: I think it's all of us are underestimating how much it will take.
[Guest]: I think it's going to take longer than what people think it might take, but it is going
[Guest]: back to that other, you know, I like to do this.
[Guest]: And just because you brought this up, suddenly, you know, the other notion came in.
[Guest]: It's this notion in economics by this economist called Minsky, which is the Minsky cycle,
[Guest]: that in the root, in the heart of the boom is the seed of the bust, right.
[Guest]: And which is what happened in the GFC, in the subprime crisis, right.
[Guest]: So I think the Minskyian moment will, I think it's already happened.
[Guest]: As you build the agglomeration, you've already seeded it.
[Guest]: It's a question of when it grows up, becomes a large tree and then, you know, cleaves this
[Guest]: whole thing.
[Guest]: We'll see.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that is...
[Amit Varma]: But what form would it take?
[Amit Varma]: Would it take a more extreme form?
[Amit Varma]: Like, the reason I ask is again, you know, you referred to Schmidt in your recent newsletter
[Amit Varma]: on, you know, why coup won't take over Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: And the obvious answer, of course, is network effects and Twitter already has that space.
[Amit Varma]: But apart from that, the two points you mentioned was one that you need an other to fight against
[Amit Varma]: for political mobilization.
[Amit Varma]: And that is something that an echo chamber won't give you, which is presumably what they
[Amit Varma]: mean coup to me.
[Amit Varma]: But the other interesting point you made, which plays into this, is that because you
[Amit Varma]: always need another, even when you seem to be a homogenous group, you will manufacture
[Amit Varma]: it within that homogenous group.
[Amit Varma]: And sometimes like I look at these, you know, right wing Twitter feeds and whatever for
[Amit Varma]: my own amusement.
[Amit Varma]: And there is already sort of these groupings between them of what they call trads and writers.
[Amit Varma]: And I haven't bothered to look deep into the distinctions, but the trads are the guys who
[Amit Varma]: says nobody should eat beef, the coercive hand of the state should prevent anybody from
[Amit Varma]: eating what they don't want, they're basically imposing their values.
[Amit Varma]: And writers, I don't really know what they're about, but, you know, I think they want to
[Amit Varma]: eat beef privately, but otherwise publicly they support Modi.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't know what the deal there is.
[Amit Varma]: So the question that then comes up is that fine, that, you know, this evolves.
[Amit Varma]: This is not how it's always going to be.
[Amit Varma]: But does it necessarily evolve in a more extreme direction in the sense that, you know, the
[Amit Varma]: trads beating the writers, for example, Yogi Adityanath or someone even more extreme becoming
[Amit Varma]: the next PM.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I ask is, and this again comes back to, you know, the change in the gravitational
[Amit Varma]: force as it were, how social media has changed everything that I think social media drives
[Amit Varma]: us naturally towards the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: There is no moderating influence anymore, there is no middle, the middle is gone.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone always has to posture and do virtue signaling to rise within their in groups.
[Amit Varma]: And the only way of doing that is by going further away to the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: And you see the same kind of schism in the liberals as well, where people will be berated
[Amit Varma]: for being too centrist or too whatever, and it's almost like a bad word.
[Amit Varma]: And you have to go more and more towards the extremes.
[Amit Varma]: And so all your incentives are towards being more extreme.
[Amit Varma]: And that makes me worried that perhaps a natural direction for politics is towards the edges,
[Amit Varma]: towards the fringes, as it were, where yesterday's fringe becomes today's mainstream, where yesterday's
[Amit Varma]: firebrand rebel rouser, Yogi ji becomes, you know, the Chief Minister of UP now.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a necessary direction or do you feel that that might be countervailed either by
[Amit Varma]: something that I'm not considering, or by the fact that, you know, in general, the future
[Amit Varma]: is unknown, unknown, so who knows something good may happen?
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So this is a fresh point to consider.
[Guest]: So let me sort of, you know, on the fly, give some, and please, please add or, you know,
[Guest]: contest some of this.
[Guest]: Let's take two views of this.
[Guest]: One is what happened when the previous agglomeration split, you know, the Congress agglomeration,
[Guest]: they split on a few things, right?
[Guest]: They split on this sub-identity, because the sub-identity was still there, there was a
[Guest]: history and there was a, you know, this, this recidivism or whatever this, it's always there,
[Guest]: I mean, people's mind.
[Guest]: And it also split on the back of some socialistic slash, you know, the sort of guys who went
[Guest]: away from Lohia and then down Karan Singh and Jabzeeban Ram and things of that kind.
[Guest]: So, and, but nobody went the sort of the extreme in that sense that nobody became a radical
[Guest]: Maoist or a communist, they went in some other direction.
[Guest]: So I have a couple of points to make, one, when you are doing this agglomeration, you
[Guest]: are again, in some sense, doing a top-down view of what the common identity is.
[Guest]: And maybe there is a reason today to come together with that top-down view, because
[Guest]: you have all kinds of imagined or real grievances and other, and all of that.
[Guest]: Once you have sort of, you know, sorted some of those things out largely, or maybe at least
[Guest]: some percent, then will your memory of what you were come back, you know, the, you know,
[Guest]: will you remember that you were, you know, during Durga Puja on the seventh day, mutton
[Guest]: was absolutely there, as you know, bhog in the house.
[Guest]: And just because now, you know, some kind of something was told to you and you sort
[Guest]: of, you know, left it.
[Guest]: And Koshavangsha is no longer the thing, which is kosher at this point in time.
[Guest]: But 10 years later, who knows, I mean, you will say, boss, that was there.
[Guest]: And all it needs is somebody reasonably persuasive and a few other grievances that you might
[Guest]: have about other things, not coming your way for it to, you know, coalesce and start another
[Guest]: sort of, you know, splinter, splintering of this.
[Guest]: So that is one sort of thought.
[Guest]: Second is economic progress.
[Guest]: I mean, what would it mean that if today we are at $2,000 per capita economy, and if we
[Guest]: become 5,000, how much of these things, and then you have further aspirations of growth,
[Guest]: or if you don't get to 5,000, either way, how would you look at some of these things?
[Guest]: You would look at these things as success that actually has sated you, and you are very
[Guest]: happy despite having not enough growth and everything.
[Guest]: And will you be able to continue with that, you know, frame of mind that this is fine?
[Guest]: Or even otherwise, once you get to 5,000, would that make you ask for more?
[Guest]: And you'll say, why not 10,000?
[Guest]: And then what does it mean for us to do 10,000?
[Guest]: And once you are in that journey, you will realize that, you know, market is something
[Guest]: that brings freedom, brings individual choice.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it is the easiest way to break, you know, a lot of, you know, whatever,
[Guest]: you know, some of these firm social beliefs, et cetera.
[Guest]: So that now that is another one.
[Guest]: And I see this.
[Guest]: I mean, some of these are like apparent to me in many of these conversations with friends
[Guest]: and others.
[Guest]: The guy is sort of starting to become more and more, you know, whatever, right wing and
[Guest]: conservative.
[Guest]: But, you know, in the same instance, he's posing, I mean, he's very happy that his daughter
[Guest]: is wearing a short and, you know, sleeveless t-shirt, and he wants her to go somewhere.
[Guest]: And somewhere these two forces will, you know, come against one another, because somebody
[Guest]: out there is pushing against this also, right?
[Guest]: So today you might say all of that while on Facebook, you're posting, you know, things
[Unknown]: that your wife is wearing a sleeveless, which, you know, you never know three years later,
[Guest]: some guy will say, boss, that is also not allowed.
[Guest]: You know, so this, I mean, the thing that once you are done with some first level objectives
[Guest]: for which you are agglomerating, the next and the next level of objectives that people
[Guest]: might go for might actually bring you into that Smitty and friend and enemy, you know,
[Unknown]: distinction.
[Guest]: So I have a feeling that's also something that might happen.
[Guest]: I mean, eventually maybe it's not, it's not going to the other sort of extreme.
[Guest]: It might actually regress and go back into something which is slightly more, you know,
[Guest]: I would say less extreme, more moderate because people have the memories of those things and
[Guest]: people will continue to see outside and look at the world that is outside of India and
[Guest]: what's happening there.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's a great point that, you know, becoming more extreme means you become more splintered
[Amit Varma]: because they keep, there are drop offs at every point.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, and I can certainly see that if this battle between the Trads and the Raitas
[Amit Varma]: accelerates, what are the beef eaters within the party going to do or even the meat eaters
[Amit Varma]: for that matter?
[Amit Varma]: The other sort of interesting point here, again, comes back to one of the favorite theme
[Amit Varma]: of the show, which is incentives, is that, you know, the point that you made about what
[Amit Varma]: role does economics play in this?
[Amit Varma]: Because I think that economic incentives are huge.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you know, one of the reasons that there is less of, say, these identity based
[Amit Varma]: problems in cities, like nothing is solved, but you still see less caste problems in cities
[Amit Varma]: as opposed to rural areas where they're completely entrenched, is that you have a different set
[Amit Varma]: of incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you're part of a large economic network, and there are many situations where you cannot
[Amit Varma]: afford to discriminate.
[Amit Varma]: Like if you are a company in a very competitive marketplace, or by company, I don't mean just
[Amit Varma]: a big company, but you could even be a small outfit in a very competitive marketplace,
[Amit Varma]: you are competing for the best workers, you can't afford to discriminate on the basis
[Amit Varma]: of what someone's identity is, and those economic incentives come into play, and that therefore
[Amit Varma]: I'm just thinking aloud, that then there are sort of incentives coming at you from two
[Amit Varma]: kinds of networks.
[Amit Varma]: One is your economic network, where you want your economic network to be as large as possible,
[Amit Varma]: because that is most profitable for you.
[Amit Varma]: And that's where your skills can get scaled.
[Amit Varma]: But there are the incentives of your social networks, which is also feeding into your
[Amit Varma]: economic network and vice versa.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, I kind of agree that progress is sort of something that can change these incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Again, I do not want to say that this is panacea or that economic growth will solve all our
[Amit Varma]: social problems.
[Amit Varma]: Of course, it won't.
[Amit Varma]: But on the margins, it does, you know, change the incentives and make a little bit of a
[Amit Varma]: positive difference.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of something to be noted.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that comes to mind also is that, you know, in recent episodes, I've
[Amit Varma]: been musing aloud on how a lot of this is a battle between the concrete and the abstract,
[Amit Varma]: that when we focus on the concrete things in our lives, we are all actually pretty liberal
[Amit Varma]: and inclusive, you know, like your friend whose wife may wear sleeveless or whose daughter
[Amit Varma]: may wear shorts.
[Amit Varma]: But when it comes to abstract notions, we get into all these narratives, where it's
[Amit Varma]: us versus the other and these people are bad.
[Amit Varma]: So you will say that, oh, you know, Muslims are bad.
[Amit Varma]: But if you actually encounter one in person, you will be perfectly friendly and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And this is sort of this bizarre dichotomy that I can't figure out, you know, it's it's
[Amit Varma]: almost like, you know, Hitler being vegetarian, a nice guy being a fascist, like, what the
[Amit Varma]: hell is going on?
[Amit Varma]: You know, why does the abstract have so much sort of pull over our lives when we behave
[Amit Varma]: in when we think of the like, this even applies to, for example, classical liberal values,
[Amit Varma]: like I, I say that in our personal lives, you're all libertarian, right?
[Amit Varma]: We don't force anybody to do anything.
[Amit Varma]: We respect consent.
[Amit Varma]: We don't like coercion.
[Amit Varma]: You know, if you go to have a meal at a restaurant with our friends, we are not going to force
[Amit Varma]: them to eat exactly what we want them to eat.
[Amit Varma]: We are not going to force them to pay for us.
[Amit Varma]: But when we sort of abstract it out into a larger domain, suddenly consent doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: Coercion is fine.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, is this sort of and this dichotomy is kind of disturbing to me.
[Amit Varma]: Is this something that you've kind of thought about?
[Guest]: I mean, not in these terms.
[Guest]: I mean, there is this dichotomy, which I think exists in many areas, because what happens
[Guest]: is when it's concrete, then it's a bit difficult for you to, you know, play that, you know,
[Guest]: what's there in your mind out in real action, because there are other things that come into
[Guest]: play.
[Guest]: The ideas that you've been brought up with, you know, for a fact that, you know, you can't
[Guest]: be bad to a person on his face, abuse him onto his face.
[Guest]: Most of us would not do that.
[Guest]: But in abstract, I think it's a bit more, you know, you have these things in your mind,
[Guest]: which are biases, which you keep getting reinforced when you are having, you know, conversation
[Guest]: when you are reading things and things of that kind.
[Guest]: Now, I have a feeling that the, for the people who actually act on the abstract views that
[Guest]: they have, on the abstract notions that they have, there are a few who don't make this
[Guest]: difference and who act on it.
[Guest]: They actually get emboldened because of the fact that there are way more people that are
[Guest]: actually having these abstract notions, because the guys having the abstract notions will
[Guest]: continue to give license to people who will actually act in this manner, till it actually
[Guest]: starts impacting their life, which is when the splintering hopefully, or whenever the
[Guest]: splintering happens, might happen that way.
[Guest]: But yeah, I mean, I really don't know.
[Guest]: I think there are many places where I would say that the same thing applies to me.
[Guest]: I have some abstract views, but when I actually get in front of somebody, I'm not telling
[Guest]: him that, you know, what I have in my mind, exactly, or I'm not behaving in that manner,
[Guest]: which I thought I would behave because I was thinking about it that way.
[Guest]: So I think that's mind-body dualism it is, eventually, since we have a mind and then
[Guest]: the body acts differently, because it's still dual.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So one sort of final, and before we kind of move on, just, I again want to clarify that
[Amit Varma]: lest I be seen as generalizing too much, of course, there are exceptions, there are abstract
[Amit Varma]: concepts which are good and beautiful, like freedom and individual liberty.
[Amit Varma]: And there are concrete actions which people do, which are a problem, which is why our
[Amit Varma]: world is not a perfect world.
[Amit Varma]: People do go out and lynch others because they are allegedly, you know, eating the wrong
[Amit Varma]: kind of food or dating someone that, you know, the lyncher would rather have had an opportunity
[Amit Varma]: to date instead.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, let's kind of move on to our final political subject before we move on
[Amit Varma]: to economics.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm thinking of our Prime Minister, Narendra Modi, fascinating character.
[Amit Varma]: And in edition 33 of your newsletter, you wrote, quote, even his detractors will admit
[Amit Varma]: PM Modi is a transformational political leader.
[Amit Varma]: He has an appeal that transcends ideological positions on both statism and recognition
[Amit Varma]: in Indian polity.
[Amit Varma]: His arrival coincided with a temporal phase in the Indian society that enabled him to
[Amit Varma]: shift the ideological position of the medium Indian voter proximate to that of the BJP.
[Amit Varma]: This has meant a Modi coalition of voters, which only exists because he has willed it.
[Amit Varma]: Unfortunately, he hasn't been able to transplant his success as a transformation leader in
[Amit Varma]: electoral area to governance.
[Amit Varma]: This is a surprise.
[Amit Varma]: The meticulous planning and the attention to details that mark his electoral success
[Amit Varma]: are conspicuously absent in many of the key decisions he has taken over the years.
[Amit Varma]: And I think at one point even I wrote a sort of a column when I think Amit Shah was made
[Amit Varma]: Home Minister about that someone who is such a remarkable political strategist, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and almost single handedly the architect of BJP's great win in 2014.
[Amit Varma]: Can he bring any of those skills to governance?
[Amit Varma]: And I felt he wouldn't.
[Amit Varma]: I felt it wouldn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason it possibly doesn't happen in Modi's case is simply because of the incentives.
[Amit Varma]: You know, in politics, they'll put everything into it, because that is an incentive the
[Amit Varma]: will to power.
[Amit Varma]: But when you are in government, the how you govern has actually nothing to do with whether
[Amit Varma]: you get reelected or not.
[Amit Varma]: Everything has to do with narrative control, which those guys are pretty good at, though
[Amit Varma]: I think they make a lot of mistakes as well, such as, you know, letting their IT cell run
[Amit Varma]: the narrative on issues where you need sort of a less thuggish kind of thinking, you know,
[Amit Varma]: as in the case of the farm bills, where they lost the narrative completely, I think, you
[Amit Varma]: know, with the way they came down on the protests and painted the protesters as anti-national.
[Amit Varma]: So one could argue that that may work for them in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: But I just felt that there was a more sort of statesman like approach they could have
[Amit Varma]: taken, though that is perhaps expecting too much of this lot.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you think of Modi when you sort of look at him that at one level such a remarkable
[Amit Varma]: politician and again by remarkable, I don't mean it in a good or bad way, it's just a
[Amit Varma]: fact in terms of what he achieved in politics and, you know, building this vote bank and
[Amit Varma]: the kind of leadership that he has.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, you know, in governance, you know, just the opposite.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you make of this fascinating figure?
[Guest]: So I mean, listen, I think all of us agree that in terms of maybe there are only two
[Guest]: or three really transformative political leaders that have emerged in the post-independent
[Guest]: India and in some ways, I think Modi will eventually tower above all of them by the
[Guest]: time, you know, Modi's innings is over.
[Guest]: And the question is, you know, what is the legacy going to be in the long run?
[Guest]: And I still hold out some hope for a reason, for a reason, because I think that in some
[Guest]: sense, he also is aware of the fact that, you know, what he has done politically is,
[Guest]: you know, almost unbeatable, at least insofar as he's active in politics.
[Guest]: But then, you know, what is the hundred year view of him?
[Guest]: And I think my view is a lot of really good politicians do have this in their minds that,
[Guest]: you know, how is history going to judge me?
[Guest]: And I have a hope, I mean, this is more optimism speaking, that as more electoral victories
[Guest]: pile up and as you sort of, you know, finish off all the final frontiers, you know, you
[Guest]: have not won Bengal, you might win Bengal and you not won some other southern state,
[Guest]: you win those southern states.
[Guest]: And it might happen in the next couple of years, for all you know.
[Guest]: This question will start animating, at least I hope it starts animating, you know, him.
[Guest]: And I have a feeling that, again, maybe it's optimism in my mind, but I think there are
[Guest]: some signs of that as maybe the pandemic has precipitated it, maybe the time is right now
[Guest]: because there is, you know, absolute decimation of the opposition, because, you know, once
[Guest]: you have decimated the opposition and once you have pretty much, you know, won all the
[Guest]: sort of electoral battles you have to win, it's natural for someone who has a high achievement
[Guest]: orientation, has a sense of, you know, that history should view me in a certain way, for
[Guest]: them to do something more, right.
[Guest]: So I have that kind of, you know, expectation that this thing might turn a bit differently
[Guest]: than what people are thinking that it might go.
[Guest]: And some of it is also my hope that, you know, we actually get to see that because with that
[Guest]: kind of both political capital and the ability to set the narrative, I mean, if channelled
[Guest]: the right way, this can be transformational for the country.
[Guest]: I mean, and, you know, we should somehow both hope as well as make this effort through various
[Guest]: means that, you know, that the right message and the right sort of, because politically
[Guest]: to sort of fight and defeat, I don't think is happening easily.
[Guest]: So if you're an optimist, then the hope is that the right agenda is then picked up.
[Guest]: And then you hope that if there are ways to sort of make sure that the right agenda is
[Guest]: picked up through whichever means that you can, you know, employ, you hope that that
[Amit Varma]: is picked up.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I'll also think about on a couple of points, which I'll make to that.
[Amit Varma]: And one is that, I mean, I don't know if you've heard similar whispers, but I've heard murmurings
[Amit Varma]: from the corridors of power that, you know, there's a bit of a rift forming between Modi
[Amit Varma]: and Shah, because Modi really cares about his image, especially to foreigners.
[Amit Varma]: And he's a little pissed off that so many of the things Shah does with the home ministries,
[Amit Varma]: CAA onwards, is hurting his image abroad.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't think Modi really listens to Rihanna while he's out doing yoga.
[Amit Varma]: But those kinds of tweets cannot be something that he would not consider avoidable.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, so maybe there's a ray of light there.
[Amit Varma]: But then, you know, I look back at the mandate he got in 2014, he could have done pretty
[Amit Varma]: much anything then.
[Amit Varma]: And what did he do?
[Amit Varma]: He did demonetization, which, as I will say, for the hundredth time on the show is the
[Amit Varma]: largest assault on property rights in human history.
[Amit Varma]: But my other reaction to what you said was that, let us say that he gets all of this,
[Amit Varma]: he gets that, okay, I got the mandate, I am the greatest politician, I am the election
[Amit Varma]: overlord or the election OG, as it were, now the question is, I want to leave a legacy.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is, aspiration has to meet ability and ability doesn't just mean governance ability
[Amit Varma]: in terms of getting things done, but also includes the vision and the intelligence and
[Amit Varma]: the humility to learn.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I once wrote a column called the Aankho Dekhi Prime Minister, which was
[Amit Varma]: based on an anecdote, a friend of the Prime Minister told me that she mentioned that once
[Amit Varma]: about 13 years ago or something, she was, when he was in Gujarat, she was at a house
[Amit Varma]: at a gathering of seven, eight people.
[Amit Varma]: And Modi started telling them a story about how once his mother was very ill, and she
[Amit Varma]: was feeling hot.
[Amit Varma]: So he went to switch on the fan, and then he realized there was no electricity.
[Amit Varma]: And from then on, he decided that, you know, if he ever is in a position of power, he'll
[Amit Varma]: do something to get electricity to poor people.
[Amit Varma]: And her point was that as CM of Gujarat, he did do that or try to do that whatever I mean,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know what the facts on the ground are in terms of getting electricity to every
[Amit Varma]: village.
[Amit Varma]: And my friend's point there was that he, his view of the world is very experiential.
[Amit Varma]: He's experienced the importance of electricity, he would have experienced the importance of
[Amit Varma]: good roads, whatever he can experience, he can then try to do something about.
[Amit Varma]: But now the point is when you beyond a certain scale beyond the scale of a neighborhood or
[Amit Varma]: even a village, it's not just about what you experience when you're running a country,
[Amit Varma]: the whole bunch of abstract conceptual models and all are important for you to understand.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, one of the ways of getting that is through a lot of reading.
[Amit Varma]: Now, obviously, he didn't have a privileged enough childhood to be someone who read a
[Amit Varma]: lot of books, and one cannot hold that against him.
[Amit Varma]: But otherwise, what a good leader would do is, you know, have a ton of humility, surround
[Amit Varma]: himself with people who know these things and, and rely on them.
[Amit Varma]: And you wrote in that column in that edition of your newsletter, where you said that a
[Amit Varma]: lot of his thinking when it comes to governance is system one thinking, you know, he's going
[Amit Varma]: by his intuitions or his folksy wisdom.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, I can see Demon would have also come from there that, oh, kaala paisa hai,
[Amit Varma]: kya karne ka, let's ban the big notes without realizing that, you know, 85% of the currency
[Amit Varma]: is whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And, and this again brings me to the question of, you've also, you know, spoken about how
[Amit Varma]: experts in the government are like lampposts, where you've said that, you know, the government
[Amit Varma]: will use the experts like a drunk uses a lamppost for support and not illumination.
[Amit Varma]: And I have written a column in the past, which I linked from the show notes about how, you
[Amit Varma]: know, there are so many well meaning people who became in Lenin's phrase, useful idiots
[Amit Varma]: for the government that they would lend their credibility and their voice because they thought,
[Amit Varma]: hey, our teacher will rise within the government or we'll get some good change done or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: whatever the intentions were.
[Amit Varma]: But they ended up legitimizing a lot that was nonsensical, including, you know, things
[Amit Varma]: like demonetization.
[Amit Varma]: And in an aside, it strikes me that, you know, you're talking about Carl Schmitt earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, Carl Schmitt was also a similarly useful idiot for Hitler.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, was attacked from within also in 1936 from within the Nazi Party for, you
[Amit Varma]: know, not being sincere enough and being exactly that.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your take on this kind of landscape that we have seen, where all the experts who
[Amit Varma]: remain are basically, you know, I don't want to use a pejorative on the show, and I can't
[Amit Varma]: think of anything else when it comes to describing them.
[Guest]: I think there are, I mean, let's take the optimistic scenario.
[Guest]: And then let's take the pessimistic scenario here.
[Guest]: I think for where we are, in terms of, you know, economic growth, and I don't think that
[Guest]: you need very sharp, deeply felt, deeply thought, you know, economic sort of decision making
[Unknown]: instincts.
[Guest]: We have very basic, you know, things that we have to get right.
[Guest]: And my view on this one is that maybe in the past, you know, some of these ideas of black
[Guest]: money, etc, were manifesto driven things, then you have to do something about it.
[Guest]: And maybe you chose the wrong one.
[Guest]: But I mean, if you just take Infra, you take Agri, you take a few other things, I think
[Guest]: the decisions here are very apparent for most people.
[Guest]: I mean, we are not at that stage where we need economic thinking of the kind that is
[Guest]: very nuanced, because we have a very sort of nuanced problem to address.
[Guest]: So my sense is that it's more a will and a point that I would now take this and solve
[Guest]: it with the simplest of sort of interventions, which I know will still be better than where
[Guest]: we are today.
[Guest]: I think farm laws are that kind of intervention.
[Guest]: I think it's good, you know, maybe the narrative building and the consensus and everything
[Guest]: around it is not something that happened in the right manner.
[Guest]: So that's one optimistic sort of, you know, way of looking at this.
[Guest]: I mean, and there are some parallels here, right?
[Guest]: I mean, you take Regan, Regan was not, I mean, I would hazard a guess that he was not necessarily
[Guest]: a guy who used to read a lot.
[Guest]: I know for a fact that I, you know, I did an interview of one of his sort of guys who
[Guest]: was his, I think, press secretary or someone, used to watch a movie every Friday evening
[Guest]: with Nancy Reagan at the White House.
[Guest]: I think that was what he used to do very regularly, but I don't think so, he read a lot.
[Guest]: Now, you might argue that he had maybe a, you know, a Milton Friedman and, you know,
[Guest]: the entire Friedman sort of, you know, whatever, Rat Pack, which supported and gave an intellectual,
[Guest]: you know, sort of foundation and structure to what he was planning to do.
[Guest]: And he followed it to the T. Now, is that something that is lacking in India?
[Guest]: I would say that if you look at it very conventionally and, you know, you take the fact that, okay,
[Guest]: the right kind of intellectual support should come from a certain kind of universities,
[Guest]: a certain kind of background, it's not there.
[Guest]: But again, my question is, if you keep some of these things simple, you will still achieve
[Guest]: a lot.
[Guest]: And I'm hoping that you, as long as we keep it simple and we do the smaller things, the
[Guest]: simpler things, right?
[Guest]: I think we can achieve still a lot of lot in the next five, 10 years, instead of trying
[Guest]: to do the more complex things.
[Guest]: The more complex things we can get there, or if you leave them aside, they will sort
[Guest]: themselves out.
[Guest]: I mean, so I still believe just Infra and Agri are too big enough agenda to take care
[Guest]: of next five, seven years of India.
[Guest]: I mean, if you sort them in the right manner, and then you don't shoot yourself in foot
[Guest]: with some completely crazy out of the park or whatever, out of the left field idea like
[Guest]: demon or something, and you just do two or three things right, because all other forces
[Guest]: of digital and data revolution and things of that kind are anyway supporting some of
[Guest]: these broader sort of trends of people getting into the mainstream, getting into formal economy
[Guest]: and things of that kind.
[Guest]: So I'm hoping again here that if you just focus on a few small important things, which
[Guest]: are simple enough for everyone to understand and do, we'll still achieve a lot in the next
[Guest]: five years.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's kind of a good point.
[Amit Varma]: And aside on Reagan, I think at least Reagan's instincts were wonderful, they came from the
[Amit Varma]: right place.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not sure Modi's instincts are necessarily like that, that they're even coherent or consistent.
[Amit Varma]: And equally, you look at the other transformative figure of that times, Margaret Thatcher, that
[Amit Varma]: in her first cabinet meeting as Prime Minister, apparently, she put a book by Hayek, I think
[Amit Varma]: it was a constitution of liberty, I forget which one, put a book by Hayek on the table
[Amit Varma]: and said, this is going to be what is going to guide us in the next few years.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, may not have been entirely consistent with that there is a political
[Amit Varma]: economy, but starting with at least the right framework, while I'm not sure that's even
[Amit Varma]: there in Modi's case, I mean, my sense in Modi's case is all the good things that he
[Amit Varma]: said like, you know, minimum government, maximum governance, the kind of stuff that we could
[Amit Varma]: agree with was not some core conviction.
[Amit Varma]: These were lines given to him by one group of intellectuals, he thought he wanted on
[Amit Varma]: his side.
[Amit Varma]: So he just kind of said it if he, you know, if I think his actions would have been very
[Amit Varma]: different if his convictions were anywhere near there.
[Amit Varma]: And as far as the farm bills are concerned, I had an episode with Ajay Shah on it recently.
[Amit Varma]: And there is also, I guess, a fundamental sort of tragedy in the sense that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: both Ajay and I agreed that there is a lot about these farm bills, which is great, which
[Amit Varma]: will help farmers, which all the parties have had on the agenda before, which all experts
[Amit Varma]: agree will, you know, make a big difference.
[Amit Varma]: You know, given how the status quo has performed, it's almost criminal to support it after what
[Amit Varma]: it has done to farmers for seven decades.
[Amit Varma]: And yet the Modi government messed it up completely in terms of not building consensus, you know,
[Amit Varma]: not seeing the unintended consequences of it, like, you know, you and Pranay have written
[Amit Varma]: about at length in your newsletter, and that kind of felt sort of a little tragic in the
[Amit Varma]: ways played out because they've just handled it really badly, this painting of the farmers
[Amit Varma]: as anti-national and bringing in Khalistan into this and all this nonsense about it's
[Amit Varma]: a conspiracy against India.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of wonder that, you know, even if good economics is accompanied by bad politics
[Amit Varma]: of this sort, and it fails because of that reason, you know, it'll kind of be tragic.
[Amit Varma]: But like you pointed out, yeah, I mean, thinking about it, there are a certain set of reforms
[Amit Varma]: which should not be rocket science and should be doable.
[Amit Varma]: But there will be opposition to it for the sake of opposition anyway, right?
[Amit Varma]: Like privatizations, for example, you know, things that the opposition would have put
[Amit Varma]: in the manifesto, but if the Modi government does it, they will oppose it and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: mobilize against it.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, what does one do?
[Guest]: Yeah, but I think the only good part here is that the power of narrative is with them.
[Guest]: So I mean, if used in, which is what my point remains that if you handle it well, this can
[Guest]: be quite transformational.
[Guest]: And I'm still hoping that when some of these things that you have sought to achieve from
[Guest]: a political perspective, those ends are met, all the final frontiers are, you know, finally
[Guest]: done and dusted with.
[Guest]: And I think that we are possibly at the homestretch of some of those political ends and then hopefully,
[Guest]: you know, you will get some action happening on the, on the, on the, on in the areas that
[Guest]: all of us want the action to happen.
[Guest]: That's the hope.
[Guest]: But otherwise, you know, you will, you will not, you will not, you know, sort of start
[Guest]: the day or end the day well, based on the news cycle that's around you.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And it's honestly not only Modi's will that comes into play, the mindset of the bureaucracy
[Amit Varma]: and the Indian state, the deep state, as it were, the inertia that's built into the system
[Amit Varma]: comes into play as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I'll quote another sort of lovely passage from you, which is from edition 25, where
[Amit Varma]: you write quote, the default mental model of the economy among the executive and the
[Amit Varma]: legislature is that of a giant planning machine, where you plan for a certain volume of output,
[Amit Varma]: say motorbikes, and you derive a specific volume of inputs, steel, tires, plastics,
[Amit Varma]: et cetera, that you must produce.
[Amit Varma]: You do this for each industry.
[Amit Varma]: And the planning algorithm will give you a complete picture of what every sector must
[Amit Varma]: produce every year.
[Amit Varma]: Granted, the reality has changed a bit over the years, but the schema is planted deep
[Amit Varma]: in the minds.
[Amit Varma]: This is a PC Mahalanobis model, a variant of the Leontief input output model overseeing
[Amit Varma]: this is a grand vizier of central planning.
[Amit Varma]: The simplest gauge of efficiency of this model.
[Amit Varma]: Well, my dad booked a scooter when I was born, and we got it delivered when I was in class
[Amit Varma]: seven.
[Amit Varma]: We got our lessons and virtues of patience early in life.
[Amit Varma]: Stop good.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, when young people ask me about what was the benefit of liberalization, and
[Amit Varma]: the thing is, I just remembered that, you know, back in the day, you had to wait like
[Amit Varma]: wait seven, eight years to get a freaking telephone, you know, it was, and today you
[Amit Varma]: see how accessible that is all the sectors that were liberalized, like, you know, telecom
[Amit Varma]: or airlines or whatever have become so much more accessible than they were.
[Amit Varma]: And there is scope for even more kindly reduced taxes on aviation fuel, dear government, and
[Amit Varma]: the sectors that weren't liberalized, like agriculture and education, continue to be
[Amit Varma]: our sort of problem areas.
[Amit Varma]: But broadly, you know, when we speak about this mindset, specifically, you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the default mental model of the economy among the executive and the legislature.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, is this something that you feel is changing has changed even if you because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's going to take a long, long time, it's a decades long play to be able
[Amit Varma]: to change it sufficiently in the demand end of the political marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: Certainly, many of these are unintuitive, or do you feel that there is that mindset
[Guest]: change that is happening?
[Guest]: I think I really believe and I hope also that it should come true.
[Guest]: But based on some of my empirical evidence of this, I mean, there is a generation of,
[Guest]: you know, bureaucrats who are now the liberalization generation, who are there now in the bureaucracy.
[Guest]: And you know, I don't think they, I mean, of course, the system can always, you know,
[Guest]: change you into becoming that.
[Guest]: But I think in the past, both the system as well as your instincts going in were the same.
[Guest]: And therefore, you know, there was no, absolutely no opportunity for you to go in and then change
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: Because for what?
[Guest]: I mean, you have not, there is no dissonance in your mind.
[Guest]: This is what I was taught, this is how I lived and this is what I'm seeing here.
[Guest]: But I think now there is a whole generation of, you know, I think bureaucrats and other
[Guest]: people within the state machinery who have seen something different.
[Guest]: And also the fact that, you know, just because of the liberalization, people have traveled
[Guest]: out, your brother, your cousin, somebody is there outside, they come, you go to other
[Guest]: places.
[Guest]: I think in that sense, I believe that, you know, let's take, I mean, who in the sense
[Guest]: the secretaries in various departments of the government today might be, you know, closer
[Guest]: to 60 now.
[Guest]: So these are all born in 1960s, you know, early to mid 60s.
[Guest]: And they, by the time they entered the administration, you know, the bureaucracy, they had already,
[Guest]: you know, been steeped in the previous sort of thing because you, they would have grown
[Guest]: up in 70s and then in 80s, they must have joined the machinery.
[Guest]: Then they would have seen some change around them, but you know, it's very difficult to
[Guest]: change some of the original mental models.
[Guest]: But even 10 years later, those who must have gone, must have been people like us, right?
[Guest]: You know, you, you saw one part of your life in that model and then you saw the very, very
[Guest]: different one and they might, might have entered civil services in mid to late 90s.
[Guest]: So I'm hoping that even though the system is going to be sort of still supporting a
[Guest]: grand planning, you know, kind of a, you know, model, many of them would have the instinct
[Guest]: that something of this kind is possibly not necessary.
[Guest]: I mean, it's too much of overplanning.
[Guest]: And I also feel that there are mechanisms now of, and I think I have heard and seen
[Guest]: many of these bureaucrats go to, you know, foreign universities, do six month courses,
[Guest]: one year courses on public policy and things of that kind.
[Guest]: I think some of those things should bear fruit, in my opinion, and, and, you know, I hope
[Guest]: that we get to see some of that in, in, in practice, although I'm very, I have very limited
[Guest]: interaction with many of the, some of these machineries, I have no clue whether that is
[Guest]: truly happening or not, but I would suspect that some of this should be coming up in terms
[Guest]: of, you know, the change in the mindset over the next decade, when many of these guys will
[Guest]: become joint secretaries and secretaries of various departments.
[Amit Varma]: Brilliant.
[Amit Varma]: Let's move on to lighter topics now after all this serious, dangerous talk.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: On the seen and the unseen, I often speak about positive sum games.
[Amit Varma]: Well, if you want to be surrounded by beauty, and you love fine art, I have a win-win proposition
[Amit Varma]: for you.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Indian Colors licenses images of fine art from some of the best contemporary artists
[Amit Varma]: in India and adapts them to objects of everyday use like tote bags, pouches, and home decor
[Amit Varma]: items.
[Amit Varma]: You get to surround yourself with the finest modern Indian art at affordable prices and
[Amit Varma]: artists get royalties for every product you buy.
[Amit Varma]: Win-win game.
[Amit Varma]: The Indian Colors new range is in and includes elegant yet comfortable dresses for women
[Amit Varma]: and casual shirts for men with standout motifs by artists such as Tanmay Samanta, Manisha
[Amit Varma]: Ghera Baswari, Shruti Nelson, Pradeep Mishra, and Jaydeep Mehrotra.
[Amit Varma]: Stay home, but dress smart.
[Amit Varma]: And if you're missing your friends in these lockdown days, worry not.
[Amit Varma]: You can show them you're thinking of them by buying gifts for them from Indian Colors.
[Amit Varma]: Corporate gifting is also available.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: That's colors with an OU and make art a part of your life.
[Amit Varma]: And hey, for a 15% discount, use the code unseen.
[Amit Varma]: That's right.
[Amit Varma]: Unseen for 15% off at IndianColors.com.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen, I'm chatting with Raghu Sanjaylal Jaitley about
[Amit Varma]: politics, economics, India, and his father's scooter.
[Amit Varma]: Do you guys still have that scooter, by the way?
[Amit Varma]: We do.
[Guest]: We do.
[Guest]: The scooter is still there.
[Guest]: Does someone, does someone drive it?
[Guest]: I don't think anyone drives it, but the scooter is there.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, marvelous.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: So that sounds fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one of the things that I enjoy about your newsletter, of course, is all the
[Amit Varma]: references to Bollywood, which are quite wonderful, like you have this fabulous quote, you have
[Amit Varma]: a whole bunch of fabulous quotes, but one that I noted down because I liked so much
[Amit Varma]: was, you know, quote, debt funds are like Imtiaz Ali films, stop quote, where basically
[Amit Varma]: the point was that they are all kind of the same if you think about it, but there are
[Amit Varma]: minor, minor differences between all of them, which is a sort of, which is your favorite
[Amit Varma]: Imtiaz Ali film?
[Guest]: I mean, they are like Imtiaz Ali films because they're all similar and they take you for
[Guest]: a ride.
[Guest]: Because all Imtiaz Ali films are about some kind of a ride, right?
[Guest]: And you know, you go on a long sort of self-discovery voyage one way or the other, but yeah, that's
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: Which is my favorite.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a good one.
[Amit Varma]: No, I've only seen Jab We Met, but I wasn't going to ask you about either Debt Funds
[Amit Varma]: or Imtiaz Ali.
[Amit Varma]: I was instead going to ask you about the Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley test for alcohol, which
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned in edition 32, which is a takeoff from the Bechdel test.
[Amit Varma]: Now the Bechdel test is of course named after Alison Bechdel, the brilliant graphic novelist
[Amit Varma]: who wrote one of my favorite graphic novels, Fun Home.
[Amit Varma]: And the Bechdel test is basically a test of gender inequality in fiction and films.
[Amit Varma]: And the test is that if in a book or a film, there are two women characters speaking to
[Amit Varma]: each other about something other than a man, you've passed the Bechdel test.
[Amit Varma]: Now you have something called the Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley alcohol test.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Well, I have to remember now, but I think there were three conditions.
[Amit Varma]: The alcohol test has to be, I can actually read it out because I've taken the notes.
[Amit Varma]: So should I do that?
[Amit Varma]: Please do.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So basically a Hindi film passes the test.
[Amit Varma]: If it has, or rather a Hindi film passes the Raghu Sanjay Lal Jaitley test.
[Amit Varma]: If it has two or more characters drinking without one, anyone nursing a heartbreak,
[Amit Varma]: two, planning or doing something illegal, three, singing or dancing, a stop code.
[Amit Varma]: So elaborate.
[Guest]: I mean, I think this is, I think the broader point remains one of my favorite sort of areas
[Guest]: to constantly have this sort of conversation and writing is about morality and society.
[Guest]: And my view is, I think maybe in the last 10 years, there might be a few films that
[Guest]: might possibly pass this test, but I think pre 2010, the answer to this test is zero.
[Guest]: You would find hardly any films because for some strange reason, we just cannot show the
[Guest]: idea that people can have, you know, can have fun with or whatever can indulge in what can
[Guest]: be just considered as mild vices, you know, and without, you know, getting everything
[Guest]: in twist.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: I mean, so, and the idea, I think this particular post was around consumption being a public
[Guest]: benefit.
[Guest]: I think that was the post where this comes from, but yeah, that's the, that's the thing.
[Guest]: I think only in the last 10 years, I think I've seen a few films where, you know, you
[Guest]: can see people just having a drink without doing, without going through one of these
[Guest]: three sort of life situations.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And I mean, you know, since I would, you know, since you want me to disagree with you somewhere
[Amit Varma]: or the other, I would actually say that while I agree with the conclusions that you come
[Amit Varma]: up with about the role of morality and society and all, this particular test is a bit of
[Amit Varma]: an issue for me because there is something in art called Shekhov's gun, where the great
[Amit Varma]: short story writer Anton Shekhov said that if you show a gun in the first scene of your
[Amit Varma]: story, it has to go off by at some point in the story, otherwise, what is it doing there?
[Amit Varma]: So you could similarly argue that filmmakers and writers might take the Shekhov's gun approach
[Amit Varma]: to alcohol and say that, listen, if you show alcohol, it has to lead to heartbreak or it
[Amit Varma]: has to be there for a reason.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember a long time back, someone similarly making an observation that in the movies,
[Amit Varma]: you never see someone going to the toilet, like, don't they have to go to the toilet
[Amit Varma]: in movies, which, but I don't think there's any larger philosophical point or observation
[Amit Varma]: about society that can emerge from that specific thing.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the nuggets that came up in this particular edition about drinking was that,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll quote it, where you write, quote, a study by Pehle India Foundation found a
[Amit Varma]: manufacturer needs about 10,900 certificates or licenses from various agencies to operate
[Amit Varma]: a plant in Maharashtra, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And your quote is actually incomplete, because the word that you took out from it was annually.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not that you get 10,900 licenses, once and you are done, you can run your plant,
[Amit Varma]: you have to get them every freaking year.
[Amit Varma]: And I'd done an episode with a friend on restaurant regulations, and he was a restauranteur.
[Amit Varma]: And he once told me about these two sort of, I mean, plethora of regulations, but there
[Amit Varma]: was one regulation from the excise department that there can only be one entry to your restaurant.
[Amit Varma]: So they can sort of monitor the entry of alcohol.
[Amit Varma]: And another regulation which said that from the fire department, which said that for safety
[Amit Varma]: reasons, there must be multiple entrances.
[Amit Varma]: So the thing is, whatever you do, you are on the wrong side of the law.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, it is irrelevant, because you're bribing both people anyway, along with 40
[Amit Varma]: other people for 40 other licenses, which brings me to another Bollywood film, which
[Amit Varma]: is the famous Kalyug, you know, Shyam Benegal's brilliant version of the Mahabharata, and
[Amit Varma]: which is a film with a lot of Rajas, but one Raj is dominant over the others, which is
[Amit Varma]: relevant to what we were just talking about.
[Amit Varma]: So this is not out of nowhere.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about those different Rajas.
[Guest]: Yeah, so this, so, you know, Kalyug is Benegal's take on the Mahabharata, outstanding film.
[Guest]: And the, you know, so it's Mahabharata set in early 80s, in a business family, and pretty
[Guest]: much follows the script, right, there is a, you know, there are two brothers and they
[Guest]: have their kids and you know, the empire is split between the two and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And what, what Benegal does is he gives them interesting names.
[Guest]: So the, you know, the Raj Babbar is, I guess, Yudhishthir is Dharam Raj.
[Guest]: And, you know, Kulbhushan Kharbanda is, I think, Bheem and he's some other Raj, I forget
[Guest]: now.
[Guest]: So there are three, four Rajas.
[Guest]: And my point is, when I saw the film, and I saw the film when I was quite young, but
[Guest]: it's more a retrospective sort of view about the film.
[Guest]: My point is, or there are four or five Rajas in the film, but the real Raj that dominates
[Guest]: the film script is the, is the License Permit Raj, because on the back of License Permit
[Guest]: Raj is what the, you know, the whole sort of the story turns and instead of Hastinapur
[Guest]: and you know, that one sort of split, you want only five villages or whatever that,
[Guest]: you know, the reason for which many people went to war in Mahabharata, it is actually
[Guest]: on the license that people went to war in Kanyu.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, for those of my sort of readers who want to read it, this was edition number 26,
[Amit Varma]: newsletter 26 of Anticipating the Unintended.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of talk a little bit about, you know, we often, I think at the start of
[Amit Varma]: the episode, I alluded to how we tend to kind of forget our history and where we came from.
[Amit Varma]: And I often assume when I'm talking to people that my sort of shared experience of living
[Amit Varma]: in those times, growing up in pre-liberalization India, the License Raj times, and sometimes
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of worth full to, you know, remind people that that's not necessarily the case.
[Amit Varma]: And the License Permit Raj is really the biggest villain of all, bigger than anyone else in
[Amit Varma]: the Mahabharata.
[Amit Varma]: And tell me a bit about how it sort of shaped behavior and incentives and our economy, kind
[Amit Varma]: of through the decades, like what was the fundamental problem with it, and you've described
[Amit Varma]: a few of them in this edition, of course.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So I think, I mean, the idea really was that the state believed as a central planner that,
[Guest]: you know, this is what we need.
[Guest]: And you had this matrix based on which you realize that this is the output.
[Guest]: And based on this output, these are the numbers of things that you might need.
[Guest]: And then you went out and, you know, made sure that people got licensed to manufacture
[Guest]: only that many of those pieces that you, that you decided that they should make.
[Guest]: Now, why only that many, you know, there are multiple reasons for it.
[Guest]: I think the chief among that reason was that you believed, I mean, the state believed that
[Guest]: we will have to make sure that there is no monopoly.
[Guest]: I mean, there were all kinds of restrictive trade practices act, there was suspicion that
[Guest]: people would make too much of profit and profit here out of it.
[Guest]: So the way it worked was every sort of business group got a certain license to make a certain
[Guest]: number and then somebody would come in and actually inspect that that's exactly the number
[Guest]: that you made.
[Guest]: And as you would realize that, you know, while trying to do this kind of control, there was
[Guest]: no incentive for the manufacturer to look for scale, scale advantages, you know, do
[Guest]: better quality stuff, because what's the point?
[Guest]: I mean, you, you are only making that many things.
[Guest]: There'll be a price for that because there is always going to be, you know, artificial,
[Guest]: you know, supply constraint and you will make your normal sort of profit out of that.
[Guest]: Instead what all the businesses did was they kept diversifying.
[Guest]: So it was completely inefficient allocation of capital instead of, you know, building
[Guest]: scale, competing, making sure that you are making world class products and then going
[Guest]: out and fighting in global markets.
[Guest]: All you were doing was trying to get license for the next industry because you had exhausted
[Guest]: your licenses on this.
[Guest]: And now maybe the next industry was not as sort of, you were not as good in the other
[Guest]: industry as you were in this one.
[Guest]: And that industry needed completely different skills and different business acumen and things
[Guest]: of that kind.
[Guest]: But you know, the capital allocation used to happen on the back of that.
[Guest]: So the number of ways this actually was bad for the economy is just mind blowing.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, it's, it's like, basically you write an economics book and then write
[Guest]: exactly opposite of everything that you should be doing.
[Guest]: The license permit is that there is no supply demand, you know, price is not a signal, there
[Guest]: is no real competition, allocation of capital is inefficient, you know, diversification
[Guest]: of mindless kind, which actually threatens core businesses, no ability to compete in
[Guest]: market beyond India.
[Guest]: I think it's just, it's still remarkable that some business houses actually, you know, one
[Guest]: is some of them thrived because you had to play the license game and you had to play
[Guest]: the government and the state.
[Guest]: But even then, once you got the license, the fact that business houses still survive and
[Guest]: saw through that itself, I find is quite a testimony to the resilience of some of these
[Guest]: business houses.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah, it's quite mind blowing.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, another consequence of this is that we couldn't develop world class companies
[Amit Varma]: because how do you become world class, you need scale, you need to specialize and neither
[Amit Varma]: of these two things were sort of possible within this system.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, this kind of, there are two aspects of sort of the mindset that is prevalent in
[Amit Varma]: India today, which I sometimes speculate came from this era and the way our institutions
[Amit Varma]: were designed.
[Amit Varma]: And one aspect is, of course, rent seeking rather than profit seeking, which is something
[Amit Varma]: I've spoken about in this podcast various times before that, you know, Bhagwati had
[Amit Varma]: pointed out that, you know, while Chinese have more of a profit seeking mindset, the
[Amit Varma]: Indians are more of a rent seeking mindset.
[Amit Varma]: What do we mean by that?
[Amit Varma]: Rent seeking essentially means where you use the coercive power of the state to capture
[Amit Varma]: some part of the market as it were, which you can do by being part of the state and,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and extract rent out of that.
[Amit Varma]: And our mindset somehow has become one of key, how can we exploit others?
[Amit Varma]: How can we scam others instead of thinking in sort of a positive some way that what can
[Amit Varma]: I do that creates value for others and I can make a profit out of that, which is how you
[Amit Varma]: should logically think in a free market.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that strikes me is that this cultural distrust of markets that we
[Amit Varma]: have, which has also been reflected in our popular culture through the decades, does
[Amit Varma]: it have something to do with the fact that all that you saw of markets like quite apart
[Amit Varma]: from the colonial hangover and the East India Company, all that you saw markets in independent
[Amit Varma]: India, all that you saw of the private sector, were these cronies who are corrupt and connected
[Amit Varma]: and that's how they were surviving and getting by.
[Amit Varma]: So could it be a factor that are so much of our mindset and so many aspects of our culture
[Amit Varma]: was shaped by these institutions that were put in place after independence?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I mean, I really sometimes, I mean, this is, you know, a conundrum.
[Guest]: I mean, listen, none of us really saw a businessman while growing up.
[Guest]: I mean, I didn't.
[Guest]: I was living in a like a proper public sector unit sort of housing colony, never saw a businessman.
[Guest]: But you know, this idea that business and businessmen, meaning they were like doing
[Guest]: something shady was quite deep.
[Guest]: I don't know whether the popular culture perpetuated that or we sort of, you know, actually had
[Guest]: that sense of, you know, that these guys were not exactly above board in everything that
[Guest]: they did.
[Guest]: I don't know how and where it came from.
[Guest]: I think, you know, and this is a question that I have asked many people of the previous
[Guest]: generation also that where did it come from?
[Guest]: Because many of you never saw any, you know, guy who has come coming out and exploiting
[Guest]: you or a business guy who was doing something.
[Guest]: I never got a correct answer except that the state was possibly perpetuating this myth
[Guest]: in some, you know, one form or the other saying, you know, profits are a negative thing and,
[Guest]: you know, all those kind of sort of messages across.
[Guest]: So and then I think what happened is as the license permit raj became deeper, then a lot
[Guest]: of these instincts that you had, you started seeing them get manifested whenever you had
[Guest]: the small opportunity to see a private sector at work.
[Guest]: You know, people would think that you could get by by bribing and you, I mean, basically,
[Guest]: essentially, if you're in private sector, you are doing all of these things.
[Guest]: But quite honestly, I don't know what the original sort of sin of the private sector
[Guest]: was in India, apart from the colonial part.
[Guest]: Maybe it was some of the, you know, early independence state drive, which gave the state
[Guest]: such an exalted position that it just became that anyone who even sort of, you know, stands
[Guest]: up to the state or wants to compete with the state was seen as someone who would actually
[Guest]: be profiteering.
[Guest]: It something that I have not understood at all.
[Guest]: I mean, I can see it all over the popular culture.
[Guest]: I mean, early 50s, you know, films and everything that was full of these kind of tropes.
[Guest]: But no idea where it was coming from.
[Guest]: Some people have told me that the Bengal famine was a huge, you know, sort of a mindset thing
[Guest]: on people.
[Guest]: But that was more of sort of a, you know, British Raj sort of dereliction of duty.
[Guest]: And out of that, yes, there were people who afforded and the whole of hoarding as a thing
[Guest]: that the rich people do became deeply embedded in our system.
[Guest]: Some of the farm laws are actually a result of that Bengal famine and the thought process
[Guest]: around that.
[Guest]: I don't know.
[Guest]: It's just some a whole bunch of small things that came together.
[Guest]: Popular culture definitely perpetuated it.
[Guest]: I don't think many people ever actually saw a real businessman in their life, but they
[Guest]: had a view of what businessmen did.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, this is very interesting because I was fortunate enough to have a fairly privileged
[Amit Varma]: childhood where my father was an IAS officer.
[Amit Varma]: But even I don't remember seeing a businessman in my childhood.
[Amit Varma]: As you were talking, I was thinking about, wait, who are the businessmen I had met as
[Amit Varma]: a kid?
[Amit Varma]: And I can't really think of anything until in post-liberalization India, I was out there
[Amit Varma]: working and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And then I kind of encounter that part of it, maybe where we went shopping.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, those are the only capitalists you would see who are selling you good things
[Amit Varma]: and you're perfectly happy to buy from them.
[Amit Varma]: The other very profound point that forms a TIL for me from all the newsletters of yours
[Amit Varma]: that I have read was in number 90, where you talk about political versus economic institutions,
[Amit Varma]: where you say, quote, in my view, a nation has to have its political and economic institutions
[Amit Varma]: in sync with another.
[Amit Varma]: It is difficult for it to have its political institutions extractive, exclusionary and
[Amit Varma]: rent-seeking, while its economic institutions are liberal and inclusive and yet succeed
[Amit Varma]: in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: Having an extractive and exclusionary political institution while continuing to work with
[Amit Varma]: economic institutions that are free and inclusive is an unstable equilibrium, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And you talk more about this sort of unstable equilibrium.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm fascinated by this because you point out how through the history of India, the
[Amit Varma]: balance has shifted from one to the other, where first political institutions were inclusive
[Amit Varma]: and liberal while economic institutions were statist.
[Amit Varma]: Then under Indira, they both become statist.
[Amit Varma]: Then the economic institutions reform after 1991, but then there is a bit of an about-turn
[Amit Varma]: with political institutions and, you know, now they could all sort of turn illiberal.
[Amit Varma]: So expand a bit on this kind of thinking because I haven't come across this frame anywhere
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: Yes, I again, I mean, I don't exactly recollect what sort of triggered this.
[Guest]: I think the point that possibly could have triggered is the, you know, just rethinking,
[Guest]: you know, Darren Acemoglu's, you know, book and about, you know, what actually makes nation
[Guest]: succeed or fail.
[Guest]: And his point there was that it is about institutions.
[Guest]: And he takes us through an entire sort of, you know, journey about, you know, different
[Guest]: people having views about why nations fail or succeed, eliminates geography, eliminates
[Guest]: all kinds of things and comes to a conclusion that it is about institutions.
[Guest]: And my sort of taking off point from there was, okay, what kind of institutions?
[Guest]: I mean, are you only talking political?
[Guest]: Are you talking political as well as economic?
[Guest]: And you know, is there a sort of a difference and then sort of this, you know, analysis
[Guest]: of how we might have gone out about in the last 70 years on these two institutions and
[Guest]: is there some, have these been in sync?
[Guest]: And so that's really how it sort of came about in terms of the thought process.
[Guest]: And then it sort of followed that, you know, there was a time when our political institutions,
[Guest]: not that there was a time, I think they were designed to be liberal and inclusive, unlike
[Guest]: say some of the other, you know, democratic or not so democratic governments or models
[Guest]: that other countries adopted.
[Guest]: And when that was happening, the economic institutions were fairly, I would say, different
[Guest]: from this.
[Guest]: So they didn't hew to the liberalized lines.
[Guest]: And then of course, during the 70s, both of them fell in sync, which was a disaster, a
[Guest]: complete unmitigated disaster.
[Guest]: And then, you know, then we have had a little bit of a, you know, swing the other way.
[Guest]: And the hope is, and which is again the point around, you know, what is the hope?
[Guest]: The hope is somewhere somebody will get the sort of light bulb moment that both should
[Guest]: be, you know, in sync and, you know, liberal and inclusive because, you know, how many
[Guest]: ways will you try before figuring out that this is the way that might actually work because
[Guest]: it's worked everywhere.
[Guest]: And you've now exhausted all combinations, exhausted one of this and the other.
[Guest]: So my view is, okay, you try 20 odd years of each, or 25 odd years of each.
[Guest]: Hopefully now you'll figure out that the next 25, the last 25 of the first century of India's
[Guest]: independence, you might try the last one, which is the one that possibly in my mind
[Guest]: is the best, but you'll stumble at your way and reach there.
[Guest]: I think that's really where that particular thought came from.
[Amit Varma]: Since you're thinking of the trigger, I think in this particular edition, you were talking
[Amit Varma]: about the RBI.
[Amit Varma]: So that was one of the economic institutions you sort of had in mind.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, to sort of probe a little bit further, if I may double click, if we are
[Amit Varma]: to sort of demystify that, what do we mean by economic, both political and economic institutions
[Amit Varma]: becoming more liberal and inclusive?
[Amit Varma]: What do we mean by that in concrete terms?
[Guest]: Can you expand on that a bit?
[Guest]: Yeah, I think so, the economic institutions are the institutions that we have formed over
[Guest]: the years.
[Guest]: I mean, there are, of course, regulators, there are various kinds of, you know, bodies
[Guest]: that are not exactly, I would say, that they're more permanent sort of bodies that are around,
[Guest]: whether you call it NITI, IOBIRD, Erstwhile Planning Commission, various regulators, various
[Guest]: commissions that we form.
[Guest]: And what are the mandates for these?
[Guest]: I mean, mandates for many of these are even, you know, the kind of earlier we used to have
[Guest]: these MRTP, you know, the Monopolies and Restricted Trade Practices Act, we've dismantled all
[Guest]: of them, replaced them with something more benign.
[Guest]: You know, many, many of these areas, I mean, the forex, the, what used to be called, you
[Guest]: know, I think there was an act, I forget the full form of that act, which was
[Guest]: FERA, Foreign Exchange Regulation.
[Guest]: Now, there was one before FERA, I think, Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of something,
[Guest]: smuggling activities, coffee posa, and things of that kind.
[Guest]: So, all of these have moved towards institutions that we have now created, which actually are
[Guest]: not as sort of terrible as they were in the past.
[Guest]: And the political institutions are our usual political institutions, you know, they are,
[Guest]: you know, the Parliament, the Election Commission, you know, the various bodies of legislation
[Guest]: and legislatures and administrative machinery of the state.
[Guest]: So that's where my view was that on the economic front, I think we have moved quite a bit of
[Guest]: distance and gradually turned more and more inclusive and liberal.
[Guest]: You might argue that some of the regulators, etc., have disproportionate power, but that's
[Guest]: fine.
[Guest]: I mean, I think it's true for most of the regulators in the world.
[Guest]: But broadly, they are way more forward-looking and forward-thinking than some of the things
[Guest]: that we have seen happen on the political institution space.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And in terms of political institutions?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So, I think on political institutions, if you take, I mean, I would club most of the
[Guest]: things that we do, you know, most of the institutions that we have of the kind, whether it is, you
[Guest]: know, Election Commission, or it is, you know, I mean, any of the arm of the state, whether
[Guest]: it is police or it is judiciary, or some of the things that where we have the governor
[Guest]: and, you know, many of these sort of things where you expect them to be, you know, and
[Guest]: we spoke about some of this in terms of where some of these institutions are now taking
[Guest]: an illiberal turn in the first part of the conversation.
[Guest]: I think those, we are again seeing that they have continued to remain, I think there was
[Guest]: a time when it was starting to become somewhat more inclusive and liberal.
[Guest]: But I think they are again, you know, I would say they have not kept pace with the change
[Guest]: of the economic institutions.
[Guest]: I think they have still, you know, in some places remained the same, in some places my
[Amit Varma]: fear is they are regressing.
[Amit Varma]: That's a fascinating frame to think about the problem with.
[Amit Varma]: So I've taken enough of your time.
[Amit Varma]: I'll ask you a couple of final questions.
[Amit Varma]: And I think these should be easier and less sort of depressing.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is this, that, you know, as you would know, listeners of my show are constantly
[Amit Varma]: asking me and my guests to recommend books to read.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are the foundational books that you feel everyone should read?
[Amit Varma]: Maybe books that shaped your thinking, or even if you came across some late books that
[Amit Varma]: you wish you had come across earlier and that, you know, made an impact on who you are and
[Amit Varma]: even, you know, to add a sort of another element to that books that can help people understand
[Amit Varma]: India better.
[Guest]: So in terms of, let's start with books that can help you understand India better.
[Guest]: I think I would recommend Ram Guha's, a couple of Ram Guha's books.
[Guest]: I think the India after Gandhi is a fantastic book.
[Guest]: It's a very sort of a broad, but fairly well sort of researched and thought out book about
[Guest]: where we are and what brought us here.
[Guest]: So that's one book that I found quite useful.
[Guest]: The other book that I think, and a lot of literature that's come out in the last couple
[Guest]: of years, and you have featured a lot of them on your show, are quite actually fascinating.
[Guest]: And actually, you know, we are starting to do some good work and some good, you know,
[Guest]: academic work around this in very accessible form.
[Guest]: So I think that, I mean, for me, the India's founding moment, which was Madhav Khosla,
[Guest]: that was again a fantastic book.
[Guest]: I think I learned a lot from that book, a very well researched book.
[Guest]: And I think that's again something that I would recommend.
[Guest]: I would recommend some of the books on history, which, you know, people must just go back
[Guest]: and read for the medieval India, sort of that kind of time period.
[Guest]: There is a five volume book of Jadunath Sarkar.
[Guest]: It's quite an academic book, but the fifth one is just outstanding.
[Guest]: That's just the post-Mughal, Maratha, British, East India Company sort of the phase.
[Guest]: And I read it a long time back, maybe 20 plus years back.
[Guest]: But that again, was very interesting.
[Guest]: It gives you a very sort of real perspective of all the things that the ferment, which
[Guest]: sort of led to the British East India Company sort of establishing itself, which I thought
[Guest]: was quite useful.
[Guest]: I also, I mean, on economics, I have read both Bhagwati and Sen, and I would recommend
[Guest]: both.
[Guest]: You know, I think some of the early Sen, I mean, especially books on where he writes
[Guest]: on freedom, I think those are very good.
[Guest]: And I think there is a lot there, which will change your view about how, what Sen really
[Amit Varma]: believes in.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in edition 82 of your newsletter, you write about Amartya Sen and freedom and
[Amit Varma]: how you began to reconsider some of his ideas.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll link that from the show notes as well.
[Amit Varma]: I did plan to ask you about that and about Rawls versus Nozick and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But we'll have to save that for some other day.
[Amit Varma]: But sorry, sorry to interrupt.
[Amit Varma]: Do continue.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that's, I would recommend both Sen and Bhagwati.
[Guest]: I think both are very good, very interesting books.
[Guest]: The Idea of India, which was Sunil Khildani's book in 97, on the 50th anniversary of Indian
[Guest]: independence.
[Guest]: Again, fantastic book, very informative.
[Guest]: And you know, one of the great influences of my life, again, forget the person, read
[Guest]: his book, kind of a guy, is Naipaul.
[Guest]: And I find all three of Naipaul's books on India are very, very interesting.
[Guest]: He was a perceptive observer.
[Guest]: You know, he was a person who could spend like a day in a place and dig out things that
[Guest]: you would take ages to ever figure out that this is what is happening there.
[Guest]: So all three Naipaul books are very, very interesting.
[Guest]: You can discount some of his ideas about India and you can discount some of the views he
[Guest]: later had about his political views.
[Guest]: But I think as just understanding of India, you can't argue that he got it right in all
[Amit Varma]: the three of the books.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous.
[Amit Varma]: And now my final question for you.
[Amit Varma]: This is not the hope and despair question, but rather as you, in your news, in the many
[Amit Varma]: editions of your newsletters, you've sort of made me rethink things that I hadn't thought
[Amit Varma]: so deeply about and, you know, given me a few TIL moments.
[Amit Varma]: So can you share with me one or more, but you know, more would be Sone Pe Sohaga.
[Amit Varma]: But can you share with me one idea that you think everyone should internalize?
[Amit Varma]: One notion or concept or idea which you think everyone should internalize?
[Amit Varma]: So obviously something that's not popular right now.
[Guest]: No, I think on this again, I think we will end the show on a strong note of agreement
[Guest]: because the one idea that I think everyone should internalize is that spontaneous order
[Guest]: works.
[Guest]: I mean, there is something called spontaneous order, boss.
[Guest]: I mean, let people have individual liberty and freedom, let them choose their things
[Guest]: if they choose, people do multitudes of these transactions, you know, all of these things
[Guest]: then together create something where, you know, order comes on its own.
[Guest]: Nobody needs to direct it.
[Guest]: Nobody needs to guide it to a certain place.
[Guest]: It's been proven over and over again.
[Guest]: And any amount of tinkering with this, shifting this, trying to do something around this with
[Guest]: all the good intentions actually leads to worse outcomes, proven time and again.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent.
[Amit Varma]: That is a note of agreement.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, voluntary action, Zindabad, state coercion, Murdabad, and on that adequately
[Amit Varma]: filmy note, Raghu, let me thank you once again for, you know, sharing your time and your
[Amit Varma]: insights with me.
[Guest]: Thank you, Amit.
[Guest]: That was absolutely a pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to publicpolicy.substack.com
[Amit Varma]: and subscribe to Anticipating the Unintended by Pranay Kotasane and Raghu Sanjelal Jaitley.
[Amit Varma]: This is India's Best Newsletter and I will give it competition.
[Amit Varma]: I am also resuming my own newsletter.
[Amit Varma]: So do follow me at IndiaUncut.substack.com.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A, and you can browse past
[Amit Varma]: episodes of The Seen and the Unseen at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Amit Varma]: Did you enjoy this episode of The Seen and the Unseen?
[Amit Varma]: If so, would you like to support the production of the show?
[Amit Varma]: You can go over to seenunseen.in and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive
[Amit Varma]: and kicking.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you!